AHSC 610 Group Process Intervention (3 credits)
This course is oriented to the theory and practice of intervention in small groups. The course involves participation in a small group laboratory through which students’ experiences are integrated with conceptual frameworks, including theories of group development and leadership. Ethical issues in group processes will be considered.
AHSC 620 Learning and Individual Change Processes (3 credits)
This course will examine research and theory of individual learning and change which involves cognitive, affective and behavioural components. Intervention with an emphasis on a normative re-educative approach to facilitating learning and change will be emphasized. Illustrative intervention cases will be examined to identify essential qualities, underlying assumptions about learning and change in the context of human systems, and implications for the role of the intervener.
AHSC 631 Research Methods (3 credits)
This course examines research methods involved in action research and other applied field perspectives. Methods applicable at all stages of the research process include the literature review, defining the purpose of study, design of quantitative and qualitative research tools, data gathering, qualitative and quantitative data analysis, and reporting and communicating research results and recommendations.
Note: Students who have received credit for AHSC 630 may not take this course for credit.
AHSC 632 Planning Human Systems Intervention (3 credits)
This course examines the design and implementation of intervention programs from a systems perspective based on organizational theories, needs assessment, theories of learning and change, and group processes. It builds on basic concepts of organizational dynamics and effective human systems. Emphasis is on understanding organizational and group processes, development of planning skills, and making strategic choices. Interventions are framed in the context of collaborative action research with participant involvement at all stages including problem analysis and definition, generating and selection intervention strategies, action planning, implementation, and project evaluation.
Note: Students who have received credit for AHSC 630 may not take this course for credit.
AHSC 660 Philosophy and Ethics of Intervention (3 credits)
This course will review the philosophical underpinnings of intervention in human systems with an emphasis on a normative re-educative approach. It will address core values and ethics imbedded in change efforts, as well as examining the philosophical roots of different traditions of change methodology. It will consider the philosophical implications of change agents functioning as consultants rather than experts and as process rather than content specialists. It will consider ethical and philosophical aspects of power, strategy, and conflict, among other issues associated with intervention.
AHSC 670 Consultation Methods (3 credits)
The course will examine current models of consultation. It will enable students to establish effective client-consultant relationships based on collaborative approaches to entry, diagnosis, planning, and implementation. Ethical concerns for consultation will be integrated with discussions of methodology. Through observation and analysis of student-designed interventions, the course will provide experience-based learning and feedback. Special attention will be given to considerations of power, conflict, decision-making, negotiation, problem-solving, planning, and strategy.
AHSC 680 Facilitating Individual and Group Learning Processes (6 credits)
Prerequisite: Completion of Year I coursework (AHSC 610, 620, 631, 632, 660, 670).
This course will focus on interventions at the individual and group levels. Client-centred models of working in groups to achieve learning and task objectives will be reviewed. Issues of design, planning, and implementation of learning programs for individuals and groups, including attention to power, problem-solving, decision-making and conflict management will be examined in a laboratory setting where students will plan and conduct a group learning program under supervision.
AHSC 685 Coaching Interventions and Processes (3 credits)
This course develops professional understanding of theories and methodologies relevant to individual coaching processes in the functioning of groups, organizations and communities. Emphasis is placed on the development of competencies in executive, managerial and employee coaching. Course content encompasses phases of the coaching process, communication methodologies, obstacles and barriers to change, individual change models, strategic individual interventions, dealing with resistance, philosophy and ethics of coaching, and coaching structures. Practical components are integrated into the course.
Elective Courses
AHSC 675 Introduction to Open Systems Theory (3 credits)
This course introduces the socio-ecological version of open systems theory (OST) and practice with a particular focus on the Search Conference, the Participative Design Workshop, and Unique Designs. OST was developed to promote and create change toward a world that is consciously designed by people, and for people, living harmoniously within their ecological systems, both physical and social. Students learn how to design and implement interventions in organizations, communities and larger social systems.
Note: Students who have received credit for this course under an AHSC 681 number may not take this course for credit.
AHSC 681 Special Topics (3 credits)
Topical seminars will be offered to provide perspectives about current intervention themes. These may complement students’ programs, but will not constitute part of the required curriculum. Examples include: emerging trends in organizational development; strategic planning models; the use of self as an instrument of change; intercultural issues in intervention; appreciative inquiry; complexity theory.
AHSC 682 Special Topics (6 credits)
Same as AHSC 681 when a second special topic is offered in the same term.
AHSC 695 Independent Study I (3 credits)
Students may pursue studies in areas of specialized professional interest related to the graduate program or as a means of strengthening understanding of the core areas of the graduate program.
AHSC 696 Independent Study II (3 credits)
Students may pursue a second area of specialized professional interest related to the graduate program or further develop understanding in the core areas of the graduate program.
Project
AHSC 698 Master’s Project (15 credits)
Prerequisite: Completion of AHSC 680.
Students must demonstrate their ability to conduct a complete intervention to effect change in a human system as the principal consultant in a collaborative relationship with a client representing that system. The project includes contracting with the client, gathering and analyzing data, implementing relevant intervention activities, and evaluating the intervention as well as their role.
AHSC 510 Advanced Research Methods in Youth Work (3 credits)
This course reviews approaches to applied research that are applicable to youth work practice. Students compare a range of methodological approaches, explore definitions of evidence-based practice and learn techniques for collecting, analyzing and disseminating qualitative and quantitative data. Students undertake an applied research project, relevant to an area of practice or programs of intervention with youth. Emphasis is placed on ethical issues, developmentally appropriate research practices, and accountability.
AHSC 520 Psychoeducation and Youth Work Ethics in Practice (3 credits)
This course provides an introduction to applied ethics in youth work with a focus on the Code of Ethics of the Ordre des psychoéducateurs et psychoéducatrices du Québec. It also reviews the policy, legislative and organizational contexts of the practice of psychoeducation and youth work, and considers the ways in which models of ethical decision making inform practice. Topics include confidentiality and information sharing in inter-professional contexts, balancing issues of control, empowerment and education, developing critical reflexivity, and appreciating the complexities and dilemmas inherent in youth work practice.
AHSC 522 Fundamentals of Child and Youth Care Work (3 credits)
This course provides students with an understanding of the scope and status of child and youth care work, sensitizes them to the necessary competencies and daily challenges of this work in a range of settings, and reviews relevant theory. Intervention planning in the context of psychoeducation and relational child and youth care work is emphasized.
AHSC 525 Individual and Group Intervention with Youth (3 credits)
Prerequisite: AHSC 522 previously or concurrently.
A main focus of this course is to develop skills in relationship building and communication with youth. A micro-skills approach is introduced, as well as principles of group leadership and crisis intervention with youth. Principles of reflexive youth work, including developmentally-informed group leadership, are also covered.
AHSC 527 Advanced Youth Work Intervention: Case Management and Supervision (3 credits)
Prerequisite: AHSC 525.
This course explores the fundamental concepts and theories of case management and supervision as applied to youth work practice. Topics include supervisory relationship and process issues, self-care, ethical and professional considerations, leadership and mentoring relationships, multi-disciplinary teams and teamwork, managing change, debriefing in response to a crisis and developing, implementing and monitoring effective and collaborative case plans with young people and their families.
AHSC 530 Community Youth Development (3 credits)
Prerequisite: AHSC 525.
This course explores both historical and contemporary foundations of non-formal, community-based youth development in Canada and internationally. It focuses on creating opportunities for youth to engage with individuals, organizations and institutions at the community level. Various community youth development models are explored in-depth with practical applications for community-based youth programs, including life skills, assets, resiliency, and ecological models. Emphasis is placed on research, theory and practice applied in community youth development environments.
AHSC 540 Mental Health and Addictions: Youth Work Perspectives, Policies and Practices (3 credits)
Prerequisite: AHSC 525.
This course explores the precursors, presentations, nature and impacts of mental health concerns and addictions for youth, their families, and within communities. Students have the opportunity to develop, and apply within the classroom, knowledge and skills related to addictions and mental illness prevention, assessment and intervention, and mental health promotion. Topics include an introduction to adolescent psychopathology; diagnosis, assessment, and current policy and practices in relation to the current edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of the American Psychiatric Association (DSM); the uses of standardized testing to evaluate adaptation; psychopharmacology; suicide; evidence-based and alternative treatment interventions (e.g., psychoeducational approaches; dialectical behaviour therapy);ethical and legislative considerations; and the roles/responsibilities of youth workers in the inter-professional and community care of adolescents with mental health and/or addictions concerns.
AHSC 565 Parent-Child Relations (3 credits)
This course provides an advanced understanding of parenting theories, research, and applications in the context of parent-child relations over the life span. Topics include parenting rights and responsibilities, parenting practices and programs, high-risk parenting, issues in the transition from parenting children to parenting adolescents and parental assessment.
Elective Courses
AHSC 512 Sexuality in Human Relations (3 credits)
This course provides students with knowledge of physical and psychosocial aspects of sexuality in relationships through life and specifically during adolescence with an examination of values, attitudes, and issues related to the development and expression of sexuality. Topics include gender identity development, fuzzy identities, teen pregnancy, family, cultural and media influences; historically and culturally based attitudes; prevention and sexually transmitted diseases; self-perception and identity in sexuality; sexual diversity; and emotion and sexuality. The course aims to foster respect for persons and diversity.
AHSC 513 Family Communication (3 credits)
This course is an examination of patterns, effective approaches, and issues in communication among persons in primary partnerships and families with adolescents. It also explores topics such as diversity in forms of “family,” decision-making, problem-solving, power relations, gender issues, managing differences in expectations, and the influences of cultural, social, and economic contexts. Interventions for youth work practice designed to enhance communication and strengthen the parent-youth bond are explored.
AHSC 551 Counselling Skills and Concepts (6 credits)
This course advances students’ understanding of core counselling theories and develops an understanding for theoretical and value frameworks of the youth work therapeutic relationship. It fosters the application of essential helping skills for relational practice within youth work settings. Skill areas include attending skills, such as attending to nonverbal behaviour, reflection of content, reflection of feeling, paraphrasing and summarizing, empathy, selfdisclosure; and influencing skills, such as interpretation and analysis. Also highlighted are ethical issues, attention to cultural differences, and practitioner reflexivity.
AHSC 560 Health Promotion (6 credits)
This course helps students to develop intervention skills and theoretical understanding in the area of health promotion across the lifespan. It is of particular interest to youth work students whose career interests involve lifestyle planning, health and wellness promotion, and stress management with young people. A holistic approach including cultural and developmental understandings are discussed in relation to the following topics: health and wellness, stress and illness, psychological and physical self‑appraisal processes, psychosomatic processes and disorders, understanding addictions and their management, interventions to promote health and wellness, behavioural self‑management, and issues in medical/psychological health compliance.
AHSC 598 Special Topics in Youth Work (3 credits)
Specific topics for this course and prerequisites relevant in each case are stated in the Graduate Class Schedule.
AHSC 599 Independent Study (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the Department.
Students work on topics in consultation with a study supervisor. The study may include readings, field studies, and/or research.
Fieldwork
AHSC 533 Internship I in Youth Work (3 credits)
Prerequisites: AHSC 522, 525.
This entry-level internship in youth work is designed to provide an opportunity for a first field experience that promotes integration into a clinical or normative youth work setting. A major focus is on participatory observation. Students are required to participate in a field placement one day per week, for a total of 100 hours in settings such as schools, community organizations, hospitals, or rehabilitation centres. The site is selected in consultation with the Graduate Program Director.
AHSC 537 Internship II in Youth Work (6 credits)
Prerequisites: AHSC 533 and 12 credits completed in youth work with permission of the Department.
This 220-hour internship is designed to provide a supervised apprenticeship in either a clinical or normative youth work setting that builds on the student’s previous courses. The focus of this internship is that the student fully assumes all the duties and responsibilities of a youth worker in the same site selected for the first internship. The student’s work is supervised and evaluated by an on-site field supervisor.
OR
AHSC 538 Extended Internship in Youth Work (9 credits)
Prerequisites: AHSC 533 and 12 credits completed in youth work with permission of the Department.
This 320-hour internship is designed to provide a full-time supervised experience in either a clinical or a normative youth work setting and requires additional hours to assist the student in building his/her application for licensing. The focus of this internship is that the student fully assumes all the duties and responsibilities of a youth worker in the same site selected for the first internship. The student’s work is supervised and evaluated by an on-site field supervisor.
BIOL 850 Research proposal and qualifying exam (6 credits)
The student prepares a written research proposal based upon the research topic chosen for thesis research. The proposal is prepared in consultation with the supervisory committee and contains a literature review, a progress report and a detailed description of future experiments. The proposal should demonstrate a good understanding of the background of the project, the questions to be answered, and the experimental approaches needed to answer these questions. Both the written proposal and an oral summary of the proposal are presented to the examining committee within one year of entry into the PhD program.
BIOL 890 Research and thesis (75 credits)
BIOL 696 Master’s Research and Thesis (36 credits)
The following courses in Biochemistry may be taken for credit in the program.
CHEM 670 Selected Topics in Biochemistry and Biophysics
CHEM 671 Structure and Function of Biomembranes
CHEM 673 Neurochemistry
CHEM 677 Enzyme Kinetics and Mechanism
CHEM 678 Protein Engineering and Design
BIOL 616 Current Advances in Ecological Research
This course is given in alternate years and reviews selected areas of current research in ecology, evolution and behaviour through critical analysis of recent publications. Topics vary from year to year, and are determined in part by the interests of the students. Material covered may include papers published in refereed journals, monographs or books on specialized topics, or new textbooks covering advanced topics in a relevant area. Students are responsible for giving class presentations of selected material, leading class discussions, and submitting critiques and answers to assigned essay questions. Grading is based upon class participation, oral presentations and written work. Lectures only. (No laboratory component).
BIOL 622 Advanced Techniques in Ecology *
This course introduces students to a variety of techniques of experimental design, data collection, and quantitative analysis. Students participate in a series of modules, each of which presents experimental and analytical techniques appropriate for one area of modern research in ecology, behaviour, or evolution. Some modules require students to collect and subsequently analyze original data from field or laboratory settings. Modules and their contents may vary from year to year. Tutorials and laboratory.
BIOL 623 Advanced Applied Ecology and Conservation *
This course applies principles of ecology at the individual, population, community and ecosystem level to identify and solve practical environmental problems. Topics include pollution, climate change, and farming, harvesting renewable resources, designing nature reserves and conserving bio-diversity. Lectures and tutorials.
BIOL 624 Advances in Decomposer Communities and Nutrient Cycling *
This course examines the role of the microbial community in the fundamental processes of decomposition and nutrient cycling. We discuss the role of microbes in the breakdown of organic molecules and the release and transformation of mineral elements. Emphasis is placed on the interactions between decomposition and on the interactions between bacteria, fungi, and the microbes in the maintenance of nutrient cycles. Lectures and laboratory.
BIOL 633 Advanced Immunology *
The role of the immune system in maintenance of body homeostasis will be presented with particular reference to cells and tissues of the immune system, their organization as well as their structural and functional relationships. Topics include: maturation and differentiation of B and T lymphocytes; structure and properties of antibodies; immune responses to antigens; genetic aspects of antibody synthesis; immunological considerations in AIDS, cancer, and autoimmune diseases. Lectures and seminars.
BIOL 634 Advanced Cell Biology *
Lectures dealing with selected topics in mammalian cell biology. These include introduction to the elements of cell biology. Introduction to the elements of cell culture with reference to the growth and function of non-differentiated and differentiated cells. Control of cell cycling under normal and abnormal states, mechanisms of peptide and steroid hormone action with emphasis on intracellular signaling pathways. The control of gene transcription and detailed analysis of the effect of host cell factors on virus replication. Lectures only.
BIOL 660 Advanced Plant Biochemistry *
Biochemical study of the natural constituents and secondary metabolites unique to plants. Their biosynthesis, biotransformations, and functions in plants, as well as their economic and pharmacologic importance are stressed. Lectures only.
BIOL 661 Advanced Tissue Culture *
This course looks at plant-growth regulators, nutritional requirements, and other factors necessary for in-vitro culturing of plant cells and tissues. The course also discusses methods available for nuclear transfers and the propagation of transformed plants. Lectures only.
BIOL 670 Scientific Communication
This course is offered every other year and is open to all graduate students in Biology or by special permission from the instructor. It is designed to present the requirements for publishable scientific writing, successful research proposals and the presentation of oral papers at scientific meetings. The course emphasizes good writing habits, focuses on the importance of thought, the conciseness of statements and clarity of exposition. The course combines lectures, group discussions, workshops and oral presentations. Marks are based on a number of written assignments, oral presentations as well as participation in class.
BIOL 671 Scanning Electron Microscopy *
This course is given alternate years in the Summer session and explains both the theory and practice of instrumentation and methodology. Students learn to operate the Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) and ancillary equipment such as sputter-coater and the critical point drier. Hands-on learning experience is stressed to acquire familiarity with special techniques. Instructions cover three aspects: instrumentation, specimen preparation (fixation and drying), and specimen mounting and coating. Tutorials and laboratory.
BIOL 687 Advanced Molecular Genetics *
This course concentrates on basic microbial and molecular genetics, introducing isolation and characterization of mutants, methods of mapping mutants, transposons, episomes, and recombinant DNA techniques. Lectures and conferences.
BIOL 688 Advances in Biological Regulatory Mechanisms *
This course examines the molecular basis of the control of metabolic pathways with an emphasis on procaryote systems. The course concentrates on the analysis of the rationale of experimentation used to elucidate these regulatory mechanisms. Lectures and conferences.
BIOL 689 Advanced Techniques in Molecular Biology *
Theory and practice of modern experimental procedures of molecular biology, including use of restriction enzymes, gene cloning, and hybridizations, DNA sequencing, site-directed mutagenesis, and the use of bacteria and phage in biotechnology. Laboratory and tutorials.
BIO 690 Advanced Gene Structure *
This course deals with gene regulation in eukaryotes. Topics covered include transcription, transcript processing, translation, and post-translational processes. Lectures only.
* Course descriptions listed here correspond to undergraduate course descriptions except for BIOL 616 and 670 which are not available to undergraduate students. It is understood that an instructor who grants written permission to register in the course as a graduate student will require extra work from the students for graduate credit. These courses are open to doctoral students only under exceptional circumstances.
BIOL 516 Project in Biotechnology and Genomics (6 credits)
PHIL 530 Ethical, Legal and Social Implications of Biotechnology
Elective Courses (9 credits)
BIOL 521 Industrial and Environmental Biotechnology
BIOL 523 Agriculture and Agri-Food Biotechnology
BIOL 524 High-throughput Instrumentation
BIOL 525 Biological Computing and Synthetic Biology
CHEM 678 Protein Engineering and Design
Academic Regulations
Academic Standing. Please refer to the Academic Standing section of the Calendar for a detailed review of the Academic Regulations.
Time Limit. Please refer to the Academic Regulation page for further details regarding the Time Limit requirements.
Graduation Requirement. To graduate, students must have completed all course requirements with a cumulative grade point average of at least 3.00.
Courses
BIOL 510 Bioinformatics
Prerequisites: BIOL 367 or equivalent; COMP 228 (System Hardware) or permission of the Diploma Program Director.
This course provides the tools for life scientists to interpret and analyze biological sequence data. It provides a general overview of the growth in availability of genetic information. The course covers the genetic databases; the rapidly-increasing number of genome databases, including the human genome database; the sequence homology search engines and search algorithms; software for the identification of structural sequence components; and the determination of evolutionary relationships between sequences.
BIOL 511 Structural Genomics
This course provides an overview of genome analysis including: cloning systems; sequencing strategies; methods of detecting genes and approaches to mapping genomes. It covers the theory and design of the different approaches, and the analysis of genomic data generated from them.
BIOL 512 Functional Genomics
This course focuses on the functional analysis of expressed genes and their products. Course content includes the construction and screening of normalized cDNA libraries, analysis of expressed sequence tags (ESTs), functional analysis by gene knock-outs, localization of gene products by gene knowk-ins, transcription profiling, systematic identification of proteins, and functional analysis of proteins by detection of protein-protein interactions.
BIOL 515 Biotechnology and Genomics Laboratory
This is a hands-on course on techniques used in biotechnology and genomics. Experiments conducted in this course include separation and mapping of high molecular weight DNA fragments, shotgun sequencing, ESTs sequencing, protein production in bacteria and fungi, functional analysis of protein products, protein arrays, and in vivo detection of protein interactions. This course incurs an additional fee to cover laboratory supplies and equipment.
BIOL 516 Project in Biotechnology and Genomics (6 credits)
Prerequisites: BIOL 466; BIOL 368; or permission of the Diploma Program Director.
Each student conducts a project under the supervision of a faculty member at Concordia or other research institutions affiliated with the program. The project topic requires approval by the course coordinator. The project can be taken over an 8-month (10 hours per week) of a 4-month period (20 hours per week) at Concordia or other approved institutions or companies. The project will be chosen from one or more of the following fields: biotechnology, genomics, bioinformatics, and high-throughput experimentation. The nature of the project can be research, development, or application. A student who is working full-time or part-time can pursue the project in his/her place of employment subject to approval. (Approval will only be given to projects which are clearly demonstrated to be independent of the regular work requirement). At the end of the project, the student is required to submit a report on the results of the project and present the results publicly in the form of a scientific poster or a short talk at a scheduled Genomics/Biotechnology Research Day.
BIOL 521 Industrial and Environmental Biotechnology
Prerequisites: BIOL 511; BIOL 512.
This course provides an in-depth evaluation of current biotechnology tools used in pharmaceutical and forestry industries, and in environmental remediation. New technologies and genomic approaches that can be applied to these processes are also discussed.
BIOL 523 Agriculture and Agri-Food Biotechnology
Prerequisites: BIOL 511; BIOL 512.
This course provides an overview on the use of biotechnology in agriculture and in the agri-food industry. Plant genomics and genetic manipulation of plants are emphasized. Also discussed are biotechnology methods used in reducing agricultural pollutants and converting agricultural surplus to energy.
BIOL 524 High-throughput Instrumentation
Prerequisites: BIOL 511; BIOL 512.
This is a hands-on introduction to high-throughput instruments used in biotechnology and genomics. Students are exposed to capillary electrophoresis-based DNA sequencing, microplate-based PCR reactions and purification of PCR products, construction of DNA chips, microarray scanning, and liquid handling robotics. Enrolment in this course is restricted to ten students.
BIOL 525    Biological Computing and Synthetic Biology
This is an interdisciplinary course offered to students who are either in Biology or Electrical and Computer Engineering programs. Students are introduced to the emerging field of synthetic biology and learn to design computational machines that can be implemented in biological media. The term is divided into two phases. In Phase I, Biology students learn basic computer hardware and software concepts, while Engineering students are introduced to gene structure and recombinant DNA technology. In Phase II, all students learn the principles and various applications of cell-based computational machines. Students work in teams to create a project proposal to describe the design of a computational machine using gene regulatory networks. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for COEN 6211 or for this topic under a BIOL 631 or COEN 691 number may not take this course for credit.
PHIL 530 Ethical, Legal, and Social Implications of Biotechnology
Prerequisite: BIOL 367 or permission of the Diploma Program Director.
This interdisciplinary course examines some of the ethical, legal, and social implications of recent developments in biotechnology, genomics, and bioinformatics. Students explore current debates about biotechnologies in the fields of agricultural biotechnology, global development, and environmental risk. Issues such as commercialization and intellectual property, the role of media and public perceptions of biotechnologies, and social responsibility and policy formation are also addressed.
CHEM 896: Research Proposal and Comprehensive Examination (9 credits).
A student in the doctoral program is required to present a progress report on his/her research and on future research plans. The presentation should reflect the student's awareness of current research in his/her field and demonstrate an ability to carry out a significant research problem and provide a rational approach to its solution. The student's knowledge and understanding of fundamental chemical and biochemical principles will also be examined.
The student is expected to complete CHEM 896 within 18 months of admission directly into the PhD program, or within 28 months of admission via the MSc stream. In exceptional circumstances the department may permit an extension of time for completion of this course. The CHEM 896 Examining Committee assigns one of the following two grades: (a) PASS - the student is admitted to candidacy for a PhD degree in Chemistry; (b) FAIL - the student must withdraw from the program.
CHEM 856: Doctoral Research and Thesis (72 credits).
CHEM 668: PhD Research Seminar (3 credits).
The course is designed to give students practice at communicating and defending their thesis research topic in a professional forum, and should successfully inform an audience of chemists and biochemists.
With permission from their supervisory committee students are allowed to substitute graduate level courses from other departments relevant to their research problems, or professional development (e.g., selected MBA courses) as partial fulfillment towards their degree requirements.
Thesis. Students will work on a research topic under the direction of a faculty member and present an acceptable thesis at the conclusion (CHEM 856 - Doctoral Research and Thesis). Students may submit a manuscript-based thesis following the guidelines outlined in the section on Thesis Regulations in this calendar. In addition, a public oral examination will be conducted to test the student's ability to defend the thesis.
Seminars. Each student is required to attend and participate in departmental seminars.
Cross-Registration. Students may, with the permission of their supervisory committee, cross-register for courses falling in the Topics categories in other Quebec institutions.
Academic Regulations
Academic Standing. Please refer to the Academic Standing section of the Calendar for a detailed review of the Academic Regulations.
Program Specific Requirements. Students must obtain an assessment grade point average (AGPA) of 3.00 based on a minimum of 6 credits.
Residence. The minimum period of residence is two years (6 terms) of full-time graduate study beyond the master’s degree or three years (9 terms) of full-time graduate study (or the equivalent in part-time study) beyond the bachelor’s degree for those students who are permitted to enrol for doctoral studies without completing a master’s degree. It should be understood that this is a minimum requirement, and that a longer period may be necessary in order to complete all of the work that is required for the degree.
Time Limit. Please refer to the Academic Regulation page for further details regarding the Time Limit requirements.
Graduation Requirement. In order to graduate, students must have a cumulative GPA of at least 3.00.
Courses
Specific course offerings in subject areas listed under Topics will generally vary from year to year, depending on the availability of faculty and the requirements of graduate students in the program. In the MSc program, every student must complete CHEM 666 (Seminar); in the PhD program CHEM 668 (Seminar) and CHEM 896 (Research Proposal and Comprehensive Examination) must be completed by every student.
Courses are worth 3 credits unless otherwise indicated. Over the next few years the department will offer a selection of courses from those listed below. Additional Selected Topics courses may be offered in a given year, and these will be identified by different subtitles. Further information on Selected Topics courses will be available from the department at the beginning of each academic year.
Topics in Analytical & Bioanalytical Chemistry
CHEM 610 Selected Topics in Analytical Chemistry
This course explores themes within the area of Analytical Chemistry.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. CHEM 610A, CHEM 610B, etc.
CHEM 612 Analytical Separations
Prerequisite: CHEM 218, 312, or equivalent.
High performance liquid separations on an analytical (non-preparative) scale are surveyed. Fundamental separation mechanisms and application of the techniques are discussed. Emphasis is placed on separations of biologically relevant analytes which include peptides, proteins and nucleic acids. Lectures only.
CHEM 614 Modern Aspects of Practical Mass Spectrometry
Prerequisite: CHEM 494 or equivalent, previously or concurrently.
Theoretical and operational aspects of modern mass spectrometry are discussed in a number of formal lectures and training sessions. All students must carry out an independent mass spectrometry project on their molecules of choice. Projects can be selected from all areas of chemistry, biochemistry or biology including the “omics” sciences (e.g., proteomics, metabolomics).
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a CHEM 630 number may not take this course for credit.
Topics in Bioorganic & Organic Chemistry
CHEM 620 Selected Topics in Organic Chemistry
This course explores themes within the area of Organic Chemistry.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. CHEM 620A, CHEM 620B, etc.
CHEM 621 Physical Organic Chemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 222, 235; CHEM 324 or 325; or equivalent.
Determination of organic reaction mechanisms using kinetics, activation parameters, acid-base catalysis, Bronsted catalysis law, solvent effects, medium effects, isotope effects, substitutent effects, and linear free energy relationships. Lectures only.
CHEM 623 Organic Synthesis
Prerequisite: CHEM 222, 235, 324, or equivalent.
This course is concerned with synthetic strategy and design. It provides an introduction to advanced synthetic methods and reagents, involving heteroatoms such as sulphur, phosphorus, tin and selenium, as well as an overview of the uses of protecting groups in organic chemistry. The concept of retrosynthesis and a few asymmetric reactions are discussed using syntheses of natural products from the literature as examples. Lectures only.
CHEM 625 Nucleic Acid Chemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 221, 222, 271, or equivalent.
This course introduces students to various topics in nucleic acid chemistry. The topics include nomenclature, structure and function of RNA and DNA; techniques and methods to investigate nucleic acid structure; DNA damage and repair; interaction of small molecules and proteins with nucleic acid; oligonucleotide-based therapeutics (antisense, antigene, RNAi); synthesis of purines, pyrimidines and nucleosides; and solid-phase oligonucleotide synthesis. Lectures only.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a CHEM 620 number may not take this course for credit.
CHEM 626 Reactive Intermediates
Prerequisite: CHEM 324, 325, or equivalent.
This course offers an introduction to reactive intermediates with an emphasis on structure and stability as found in modern (physical) organic chemistry. While the focus is on radicals and carbenes, carbocations are discussed near the end of the term. The material covered is relevant to chemistry and biochemistry. Lectures only.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a CHEM 621 number may not take this course for credit.
CHEM 627 Supramolecular Chemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 324 or 325; CHEM 335; or equivalent; or permission of the Department.
This course reviews some fundamental aspects of synthetic and biological supramolecular chemistry and nanotechnology. Topics covered may include supramolecular forces, ion binding and ion channels, molecular recognition, self-assembly (meso-scale and molecular-scale), organometallic supramolecular chemistry, dynamic combinatorial chemistry (DCC), and foldamers. Lectures only.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a CHEM 620 number may not take this course for credit.
Topics in Physical Chemistry
CHEM 630 Selected Topics in Physical Chemistry
This course explores themes within the area of Physical Chemistry.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. CHEM 630A, CHEM 630B, etc.
CHEM 631 Computational Chemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 234, 241, 333, or equivalent; or permission of the Department.
This course presents the concepts, tools, and techniques of modern computational chemistry, and provides a very broad overview of the various fields of application across chemistry and biochemistry. The course is divided into two parts: 1) Molecular structure, which covers molecular mechanics and elementary electronic structure theory of atoms and molecules; and 2) Chemical reactivity, which covers applications of quantum chemistry and molecular dynamics techniques to studies of chemical reactions. The applications discussed include organic molecules and their reactions, peptides and proteins, drug design, DNA, polymers, inorganics, and materials. The course includes a practical component where students acquire hands-on experience with commonly used computational chemistry computer software. Lectures and laboratory.
CHEM 632 Non-equilibrium Thermodynamics
Prerequisite: CHEM 234 or equivalent.
In this course, the basic concepts of classical (equilibrium) thermodynamics are first reviewed, followed by an introduction to statistical thermodynamics which gives a unified method of treating transport processes. At this point, the Boltzmann distribution function is derived, which leads to the statistical interpretation of entropy. Other important thermodynamic functions such as the partition function, the partition function for large ensembles and the Sackur-Tetrode equation are examined. The course also addresses non-equilibrium thermodynamics in the linear domain. The relations describing the production of entropy in irreversible processes due to heat transfer, charge transfer, change of volume, and chemical reactions are examined. The establishment of flux equations and the use of the Onsager reciprocal relations are then applied to the description of a variety of open systems. Lectures only.
CHEM 633 Quantum Mechanics in Chemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 333, 431/631, or equivalent.
This course includes a thorough review of basic quantum mechanics in both the Schroedinger and Heisenberg representations, electronic structure theory, symmetry and group theory, interaction of matter with light, quantum scattering, the path integral formalism, quantum theories of chemical reaction rates, time-dependent approaches to spectroscopy, wave packet propagation, correlation functions and dynamics processes, and density matrices. Lectures only.
CHEM 635 Interfacial Phenomena
Prerequisite: CHEM 234, 235, or equivalent.
This course examines the physical chemistry of interfaces including surface and interfacial tensions, the absorption of surface active substances/surface excess properties, and surfactant self-assembly. Topics covered may include Gibbs and Langmuir monolayers, micelle formation, emulsions, foams, surfactant liquid crystals, layer-by-layer polymer self-assembly, and biological membranes. Techniques for characterization and applications (biological and industrial) of these systems are addressed. Lectures only.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a CHEM 630 number may not take this course for credit.
CHEM 638 Physics and Chemistry of Solid State Electronic Materials
Prerequisite: CHEM 234, 333, or equivalent.
This course essentially explores how electrical conductivity is influenced by the nature of the chemical bonding in these solid-state materials. The course provides an introduction to solid-state structures and then goes on to explore band theory, the central model used to describe electrical conductivity in the following three categories of electronic materials: conductors, semiconductors, and insulators. Finally the course explores the extension of the band model to interpret electrical conductivity in molecular semiconductors and charge-transfer complexes. Lectures only.
Topics in Bioinorganic & Inorganic Chemistry
CHEM 640 Selected Topics in Inorganic Chemistry
This course explores themes within the area of Inorganic Chemistry.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. CHEM 640A, CHEM 640B, etc.
CHEM 643 Organometallic Chemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 324, 341, or equivalent.
This course covers the structure and properties of organometallic compounds, their main reactions and their application in catalysis and organic chemistry. Lectures only.
CHEM 644 Physical Methods in Chemistry
This course provides an in-depth evaluation of the different methods used in modern physical chemistry such as laser, microwave, FT-IR, electron spin resonance, nuclear magnetic resonance, x-ray photoelectron, x-ray diffraction and fluorescence, Auger eletron, Mössbauer, and gamma-ray spectroscopic analysis, as well as scanning probe microscopy and mass spectrometry. Lectures only.
CHEM 645 Bioinorganic Chemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 241, 271, or equivalent.
Role of metals in biochemical systems. Essential trace elements, zinc enzymes, oxygen transport and storage, metalloproteins and biological electron transfer, structure-function relationships in heme enzymes, nitrogen fixation; model compounds for metalloproteins and metalloenzymes. Lectures only.
CHEM 646 Industrial Catalysis
Prerequisite: CHEM 234, 235, or equivalent.
Basic and recent concepts in catalysis are described with particular emphasis on heterogenous catalysis. The technical, economic and environmental aspects of industrial catalysis are covered. The processes to be studied are chosen from the petroleum industry, the natural gas and coal processing industry, and the production of thermoplastics and synthetic fibres. The course ends with a rapid survey of problems associated with the treatment of industrial pollutants and with catalytic converters. Lectures only.
Topics in Multidisciplinary Chemistry
CHEM 650 Selected Topics in Multidisciplinary Chemistry
This course explores themes within the area of Multidisciplinary Chemistry.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. CHEM 650A, CHEM 650B, etc.
CHEM 651 Nanochemistry
Prerequisites: CHEM 217, 218, 221, 222, 234, 235, 241, or equivalent.
This modular course covers the areas of production, characterization and applications of nanoscale structures and materials. Each module is taught by a different professor as well as guest lecturers. Topics may include (but are not limited to): size dependent properties, synthesis of organic and inorganic nanostructures, self-assembled structures, chemical patterning and functional nanopatterns, biomaterials. Nanometer scale fabrication techniques such as lithographic methods, nano-stamping and patterned self-assembly are discussed. Modern analysis techniques such as atomic force microscopy and electron microscopy, which are used to map and measure at the single molecule level are introduced. Applications such as photonics, optical properties, biodetection and biosensors, micro- and nano-fluidics, nanoelectronics and nanomachines are presented. The course includes a term project carried out using the nanoscience facilities held in the department research labs.
CHEM 658 Aquatic Biogeochemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 217, 218, 312, or equivalent.
The major aim of this course is to present a quantitative treatment of the variables that determine the composition of natural waters. Chemical equilibrium is the central theme of the course, but consideration is also given to kinetics, steady-state and dynamic models. Related themes include global chemical cycles, air and water pollution, as well as current research topics in water chemistry and chemical oceanography. Lectures only.
Note: Students who have received credit for CHEM 618 or for this topic under a CHEM 610 number may not take this course for credit.
Topics in Biochemistry
CHEM 670 Selected Topics in Biochemistry and Biophysics
This course explores themes within the area of Biochemistry and Biophysics.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. CHEM 670A, CHEM 670B, etc.
CHEM 676 Structure and Function of Biomembranes
Prerequisite: BIOL 266, CHEM 375, or equivalent.
Examples from the current literature are used to discuss what is known about how the membranes of biological organisms are assembled and the roles that these membranes play in a number of important processes. Emphasis is placed on the transport of proteins to and through biomembranes and the roles that membranes play in metabolite and ion transport. Where applicable, the significance of these processes is illustrated by examining the roles of membranes in health and disease. Lectures only.
Note: Students who have received credit for CHEM 671 may not take this course for credit.
CHEM 677 Enzyme Kinetics and Mechanism
Prerequisite: CHEM 271, 375, or equivalent.
This course explores steady-state kinetics, including such topics as the use of initial velocity studies and product inhibition to establish a kinetic mechanism; nonsteady-state kinetics, isotope effects, energy of activation, and the detailed mechanisms of selected enzymes. Lectures only.
CHEM 678 Protein Engineering and Design
Prerequisite: CHEM 271, 375, or equivalent.
This course examines the principles behind protein design, how techniques of protein engineering are used, and the methods used to assess protein properties. Examples include studies of protein stability, structure-function relationships, and applications to drug design. Lectures only.
Topics in Instrumentation
CHEM 690 Selected Topics in Instrumentation
This course explores themes within the area of Instrumentation.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. CHEM 690A, CHEM 690B, etc.
CHEM 691 Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy
Prerequisite: CHEM 222, 393, or equivalent.
This course is designed to provide the background in magnetic resonance theory necessary to understand modern high-resolution NMR experiments and instrumentation. The basic theory in the introductory section also applies to electron spin resonance (ESR). Relaxation and through-bond and through-space interactions, and experiments to investigate them are considered. Spin manipulations and behaviour in multiple-pulse, Fourier transform NMR techniques used for common spectral editing and two-dimensional experiments are discussed. Lectures only.
CHEM 692 Experimental Protein Chemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 477 or equivalent or permission of the Department.
This “hands on” course introduces students to the common techniques used to study the structure and function of proteins and other macromolecules. Techniques covered include circular dichroism spectroscopy, fluorescence, UV/Vis spectroscopy, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, isothermal titration microcalorimetry, analytical ultracentrifugation, and protein crystallization/X-ray crystallography. The course includes theory, applications of the technique to the study of protein structure and function, and basic practice experiments to become familiar with the instrument and data analysis. For some of the techniques covered hands-on use will be limited. Each student is required to carry out a project on his/her own protein of interest. Each participant asks a specific question about a protein and then uses the techniques covered in the course to address the question. Lectures and laboratory.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a CHEM 690 number may not take this course for credit.
Theses, Seminars, Comprehensive Exam and Special Courses
CHEM 667 PhD Literature/Topic Seminar
CHEM 668 PhD Research Seminar
CHEM 856 Doctoral Research and Thesis (72 credits)
CHEM 896 Research Proposal and Comprehensive Examination (9 credits)
CHEM 655 - Master's Research and Thesis (33 credits);
CHEM 666 - MSc Seminar (3 credits).
This course provides an opportunity for the student to prepare and present materials concerning their current research problem in an area of chemistry or biochemistry to a critical audience. It is designed to give students practice at communicating and defending their ideas on a research topic in a professional forum, and should successfully inform a broad audience of chemists and biochemists.
With permission from their supervisory committee, students are allowed to take graduate level courses from other departments relevant to their research problems, as partial fulfillment towards their degree requirements.
Thesis. Students will work on a research topic under the direction of a faculty member and present an acceptable thesis at the conclusion. CHEM 655 - Master's Research and Thesis will be examined by the student's supervisory committee before being accepted by the department. Students may submit a manuscript-based thesis following the guidelines outlined in the section on Thesis Regulations in this calendar. In addition, an oral examination will be conducted before a committee of the department to test the student’s ability to defend the thesis.
Seminars. Each student is required to attend and participate in departmental seminars.
Research Areas. Areas for possible research are listed before the Doctor of/Doctorate in Philosophy section.
Cross-Registration. Students may, with the permission of their supervisory committee, cross-register for courses falling in the Topics categories in other Quebec institutions.
Academic Regulations
Academic Standing. Please refer to the Academic Standing section of the Calendar for a detailed review of the Academic Regulations.
Program Specific Requirements. Students must obtain an assessment grade point average (AGPA) of 2.70 based on a minimum of 6 credits.
Residence. The minimum residence requirement is one year (3 terms) of full-time study, or the equivalent in part-time study. The degree can normally be completed in two years (6 terms) of full-time study.
Time Limit. Please refer to the Academic Regulation page for further details regarding the Time Limit requirements.
Graduation Requirement. In order to graduate, students must have a cumulative GPA of at least 2.70.
Courses
Specific course offerings in subject areas listed under Topics will generally vary from year to year, depending on the availability of faculty and the requirements of graduate students in the program. In the MSc program, every student must complete CHEM 666 (Seminar); in the PhD program CHEM 668 (Seminar) and CHEM 896 (Research Proposal and Comprehensive Examination) must be completed by every student.
Courses are worth 3 credits unless otherwise indicated. Over the next few years the department will offer a selection of courses from those listed below. Additional Selected Topics courses may be offered in a given year, and these will be identified by different subtitles. Further information on Selected Topics courses will be available from the department at the beginning of each academic year.
Topics in Analytical & Bioanalytical Chemistry
CHEM 610 Selected Topics in Analytical Chemistry
This course explores themes within the area of Analytical Chemistry.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. CHEM 610A, CHEM 610B, etc.
CHEM 612 Analytical Separations
Prerequisite: CHEM 218, 312, or equivalent.
High performance liquid separations on an analytical (non-preparative) scale are surveyed. Fundamental separation mechanisms and application of the techniques are discussed. Emphasis is placed on separations of biologically relevant analytes which include peptides, proteins and nucleic acids. Lectures only.
CHEM 614 Modern Aspects of Practical Mass Spectrometry
Prerequisite: CHEM 494 or equivalent, previously or concurrently.
Theoretical and operational aspects of modern mass spectrometry are discussed in a number of formal lectures and training sessions. All students must carry out an independent mass spectrometry project on their molecules of choice. Projects can be selected from all areas of chemistry, biochemistry or biology including the “omics” sciences (e.g., proteomics, metabolomics).
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a CHEM 630 number may not take this course for credit.
Topics in Bioorganic & Organic Chemistry
CHEM 620 Selected Topics in Organic Chemistry
This course explores themes within the area of Organic Chemistry.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. CHEM 620A, CHEM 620B, etc.
CHEM 621 Physical Organic Chemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 222, 235; CHEM 324 or 325; or equivalent.
Determination of organic reaction mechanisms using kinetics, activation parameters, acid-base catalysis, Bronsted catalysis law, solvent effects, medium effects, isotope effects, substitutent effects, and linear free energy relationships. Lectures only.
CHEM 623 Organic Synthesis
Prerequisite: CHEM 222, 235, 324, or equivalent.
This course is concerned with synthetic strategy and design. It provides an introduction to advanced synthetic methods and reagents, involving heteroatoms such as sulphur, phosphorus, tin and selenium, as well as an overview of the uses of protecting groups in organic chemistry. The concept of retrosynthesis and a few asymmetric reactions are discussed using syntheses of natural products from the literature as examples. Lectures only.
CHEM 625 Nucleic Acid Chemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 221, 222, 271, or equivalent.
This course introduces students to various topics in nucleic acid chemistry. The topics include nomenclature, structure and function of RNA and DNA; techniques and methods to investigate nucleic acid structure; DNA damage and repair; interaction of small molecules and proteins with nucleic acid; oligonucleotide-based therapeutics (antisense, antigene, RNAi); synthesis of purines, pyrimidines and nucleosides; and solid-phase oligonucleotide synthesis. Lectures only.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a CHEM 620 number may not take this course for credit.
CHEM 626 Reactive Intermediates
Prerequisite: CHEM 324, 325, or equivalent.
This course offers an introduction to reactive intermediates with an emphasis on structure and stability as found in modern (physical) organic chemistry. While the focus is on radicals and carbenes, carbocations are discussed near the end of the term. The material covered is relevant to chemistry and biochemistry. Lectures only.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a CHEM 621 number may not take this course for credit.
CHEM 627 Supramolecular Chemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 324 or 325; CHEM 335; or equivalent; or permission of the Department.
This course reviews some fundamental aspects of synthetic and biological supramolecular chemistry and nanotechnology. Topics covered may include supramolecular forces, ion binding and ion channels, molecular recognition, self-assembly (meso-scale and molecular-scale), organometallic supramolecular chemistry, dynamic combinatorial chemistry (DCC), and foldamers. Lectures only.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a CHEM 620 number may not take this course for credit.
Topics in Physical Chemistry
CHEM 630 Selected Topics in Physical Chemistry
This course explores themes within the area of Physical Chemistry.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. CHEM 630A, CHEM 630B, etc.
CHEM 631 Computational Chemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 234, 241, 333, or equivalent; or permission of the Department.
This course presents the concepts, tools, and techniques of modern computational chemistry, and provides a very broad overview of the various fields of application across chemistry and biochemistry. The course is divided into two parts: 1) Molecular structure, which covers molecular mechanics and elementary electronic structure theory of atoms and molecules; and 2) Chemical reactivity, which covers applications of quantum chemistry and molecular dynamics techniques to studies of chemical reactions. The applications discussed include organic molecules and their reactions, peptides and proteins, drug design, DNA, polymers, inorganics, and materials. The course includes a practical component where students acquire hands-on experience with commonly used computational chemistry computer software. Lectures and laboratory.
CHEM 632 Non-equilibrium Thermodynamics
Prerequisite: CHEM 234 or equivalent.
In this course, the basic concepts of classical (equilibrium) thermodynamics are first reviewed, followed by an introduction to statistical thermodynamics which gives a unified method of treating transport processes. At this point, the Boltzmann distribution function is derived, which leads to the statistical interpretation of entropy. Other important thermodynamic functions such as the partition function, the partition function for large ensembles and the Sackur-Tetrode equation are examined. The course also addresses non-equilibrium thermodynamics in the linear domain. The relations describing the production of entropy in irreversible processes due to heat transfer, charge transfer, change of volume, and chemical reactions are examined. The establishment of flux equations and the use of the Onsager reciprocal relations are then applied to the description of a variety of open systems. Lectures only.
CHEM 633 Quantum Mechanics in Chemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 333, 431/631, or equivalent.
This course includes a thorough review of basic quantum mechanics in both the Schroedinger and Heisenberg representations, electronic structure theory, symmetry and group theory, interaction of matter with light, quantum scattering, the path integral formalism, quantum theories of chemical reaction rates, time-dependent approaches to spectroscopy, wave packet propagation, correlation functions and dynamics processes, and density matrices. Lectures only.
CHEM 635 Interfacial Phenomena
Prerequisite: CHEM 234, 235, or equivalent.
This course examines the physical chemistry of interfaces including surface and interfacial tensions, the absorption of surface active substances/surface excess properties, and surfactant self-assembly. Topics covered may include Gibbs and Langmuir monolayers, micelle formation, emulsions, foams, surfactant liquid crystals, layer-by-layer polymer self-assembly, and biological membranes. Techniques for characterization and applications (biological and industrial) of these systems are addressed. Lectures only.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a CHEM 630 number may not take this course for credit.
CHEM 638 Physics and Chemistry of Solid State Electronic Materials
Prerequisite: CHEM 234, 333, or equivalent.
This course essentially explores how electrical conductivity is influenced by the nature of the chemical bonding in these solid-state materials. The course provides an introduction to solid-state structures and then goes on to explore band theory, the central model used to describe electrical conductivity in the following three categories of electronic materials: conductors, semiconductors, and insulators. Finally the course explores the extension of the band model to interpret electrical conductivity in molecular semiconductors and charge-transfer complexes. Lectures only.
Topics in Bioinorganic & Inorganic Chemistry
CHEM 640 Selected Topics in Inorganic Chemistry
This course explores themes within the area of Inorganic Chemistry.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. CHEM 640A, CHEM 640B, etc.
CHEM 643 Organometallic Chemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 324, 341, or equivalent.
This course covers the structure and properties of organometallic compounds, their main reactions and their application in catalysis and organic chemistry. Lectures only.
CHEM 644 Physical Methods in Chemistry
This course provides an in-depth evaluation of the different methods used in modern physical chemistry such as laser, microwave, FT-IR, electron spin resonance, nuclear magnetic resonance, x-ray photoelectron, x-ray diffraction and fluorescence, Auger eletron, Mössbauer, and gamma-ray spectroscopic analysis, as well as scanning probe microscopy and mass spectrometry. Lectures only.
CHEM 645 Bioinorganic Chemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 241, 271, or equivalent.
Role of metals in biochemical systems. Essential trace elements, zinc enzymes, oxygen transport and storage, metalloproteins and biological electron transfer, structure-function relationships in heme enzymes, nitrogen fixation; model compounds for metalloproteins and metalloenzymes. Lectures only.
CHEM 646 Industrial Catalysis
Prerequisite: CHEM 234, 235, or equivalent.
Basic and recent concepts in catalysis are described with particular emphasis on heterogenous catalysis. The technical, economic and environmental aspects of industrial catalysis are covered. The processes to be studied are chosen from the petroleum industry, the natural gas and coal processing industry, and the production of thermoplastics and synthetic fibres. The course ends with a rapid survey of problems associated with the treatment of industrial pollutants and with catalytic converters. Lectures only.
Topics in Multidisciplinary Chemistry
CHEM 650 Selected Topics in Multidisciplinary Chemistry
This course explores themes within the area of Multidisciplinary Chemistry.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. CHEM 650A, CHEM 650B, etc.
CHEM 651 Nanochemistry
Prerequisites: CHEM 217, 218, 221, 222, 234, 235, 241, or equivalent.
This modular course covers the areas of production, characterization and applications of nanoscale structures and materials. Each module is taught by a different professor as well as guest lecturers. Topics may include (but are not limited to): size dependent properties, synthesis of organic and inorganic nanostructures, self-assembled structures, chemical patterning and functional nanopatterns, biomaterials. Nanometer scale fabrication techniques such as lithographic methods, nano-stamping and patterned self-assembly are discussed. Modern analysis techniques such as atomic force microscopy and electron microscopy, which are used to map and measure at the single molecule level are introduced. Applications such as photonics, optical properties, biodetection and biosensors, micro- and nano-fluidics, nanoelectronics and nanomachines are presented. The course includes a term project carried out using the nanoscience facilities held in the department research labs.
CHEM 658 Aquatic Biogeochemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 217, 218, 312, or equivalent.
The major aim of this course is to present a quantitative treatment of the variables that determine the composition of natural waters. Chemical equilibrium is the central theme of the course, but consideration is also given to kinetics, steady-state and dynamic models. Related themes include global chemical cycles, air and water pollution, as well as current research topics in water chemistry and chemical oceanography. Lectures only.
Note: Students who have received credit for CHEM 618 or for this topic under a CHEM 610 number may not take this course for credit.
Topics in Biochemistry
CHEM 670 Selected Topics in Biochemistry and Biophysics
This course explores themes within the area of Biochemistry and Biophysics.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. CHEM 670A, CHEM 670B, etc.
CHEM 676 Structure and Function of Biomembranes
Prerequisite: BIOL 266, CHEM 375, or equivalent.
Examples from the current literature are used to discuss what is known about how the membranes of biological organisms are assembled and the roles that these membranes play in a number of important processes. Emphasis is placed on the transport of proteins to and through biomembranes and the roles that membranes play in metabolite and ion transport. Where applicable, the significance of these processes is illustrated by examining the roles of membranes in health and disease. Lectures only.
Note: Students who have received credit for CHEM 671 may not take this course for credit.
CHEM 677 Enzyme Kinetics and Mechanism
Prerequisite: CHEM 271, 375, or equivalent.
This course explores steady-state kinetics, including such topics as the use of initial velocity studies and product inhibition to establish a kinetic mechanism; nonsteady-state kinetics, isotope effects, energy of activation, and the detailed mechanisms of selected enzymes. Lectures only.
CHEM 678 Protein Engineering and Design
Prerequisite: CHEM 271, 375, or equivalent.
This course examines the principles behind protein design, how techniques of protein engineering are used, and the methods used to assess protein properties. Examples include studies of protein stability, structure-function relationships, and applications to drug design. Lectures only.
Topics in Instrumentation
CHEM 690 Selected Topics in Instrumentation
This course explores themes within the area of Instrumentation.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. CHEM 690A, CHEM 690B, etc.
CHEM 691 Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy
Prerequisite: CHEM 222, 393, or equivalent.
This course is designed to provide the background in magnetic resonance theory necessary to understand modern high-resolution NMR experiments and instrumentation. The basic theory in the introductory section also applies to electron spin resonance (ESR). Relaxation and through-bond and through-space interactions, and experiments to investigate them are considered. Spin manipulations and behaviour in multiple-pulse, Fourier transform NMR techniques used for common spectral editing and two-dimensional experiments are discussed. Lectures only.
CHEM 692 Experimental Protein Chemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 477 or equivalent or permission of the Department.
This “hands on” course introduces students to the common techniques used to study the structure and function of proteins and other macromolecules. Techniques covered include circular dichroism spectroscopy, fluorescence, UV/Vis spectroscopy, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, isothermal titration microcalorimetry, analytical ultracentrifugation, and protein crystallization/X-ray crystallography. The course includes theory, applications of the technique to the study of protein structure and function, and basic practice experiments to become familiar with the instrument and data analysis. For some of the techniques covered hands-on use will be limited. Each student is required to carry out a project on his/her own protein of interest. Each participant asks a specific question about a protein and then uses the techniques covered in the course to address the question. Lectures and laboratory.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a CHEM 690 number may not take this course for credit.
Theses, Seminars, Comprehensive Exam and Special Courses
CHEM 655 Master’s Research and Thesis (33 credits)
CHEM 666 MSc Seminar (3 credits)
SPAN 601 Discourse Analysis and Research Methods (3 credits)
SPAN 603 Introduction to the Pedagogy of Spanish (3 credits)
Twelve credits of elective courses may be chosen from the following list:
SPAN 605 Independent Study (3 credits)
SPAN 621-630 Topics in Applied Linguistics and the pedagogy of Spanish (3 credits)
SPAN 631-640 Topics in Spanish Translation (3 credits)
SPAN 641-650 Topics in Critical Thinking and Theory (3 credits)
SPAN 651-660 Topics in the Subject and Identity (3 credits)
SPAN 661-670 Topics in Exile and Marginality (3 credits)
SPAN 671-680 Topics in History of Ideas in the Hispanic World (3 credits)
SPAN 681 Research Seminar (3 credits)
SPAN 698 Topics in Current Research (3 credits)
Note 1: Subject matter in “topics” courses varies from term to term and from year to year. Details of the courses to be given together with their respective course contents will be available at the beginning of the academic year.
Note 2: In consultation with the Graduate Program Director, students may replace up to 6 credits of reading courses, or credits at the graduate level in another discipline. Permission of the Graduate Program Director of the respective program must also be granted. Interdisciplinary courses, where relevant to the student’s program, may include courses at the graduate level in the Departments of Communication Studies, Education, English, Études françaises, Philosophy, Sociology and Anthropology, and Religions and Cultures. Approval of courses from these departments will be sought on a per-case basis.
Note 3: Students who wish to concentrate in Pedagogy or Translation may take six credits at the graduate level in the department relative to their concentration.
Twenty-seven credits in:
SPAN 694 Thesis Proposal (3 credits)
SPAN 695 Thesis (24 credits)
OR:
SPAN 682 Research Paper I (12 credits)
SPAN 683 Research Paper II (15 credits)
Course Descriptions
SPAN 601 Discourse Analysis and Research Methods (3 credits)
This course is designed to provide both a broad theoretical introduction and concrete practice in the research and analysis of literary and cultural texts. Students consider, critique, and incorporate theory and criticism into the articulation and elaboration of an analytical essay. They also implement fundamental research practices such as performing bibliographical searches and documentation; implementing narrative, argumentative, and persuasive rhetorical strategies; and, finally, developing a rigorously defended and coherent argument.
SPAN 603 Introduction to the Pedagogy of Spanish (3 credits)
In this course, students learn and implement important aspects of teaching methodology and techniques. Opportunities for observation of Spanish classes are provided. Students apply the techniques learned in micro-teaching and peer teaching exercises. Assignments include lesson planning and the evaluation of teaching performance. This course will be offered in the first semester of every year. In order to integrate practice into the curriculum, an effort will be made to offer students an opportunity to teach an Introductory Spanish language course.
SPAN 605 Independent Study (3 credits)
Under the supervision of a faculty member, the student undertakes research in a defined topic related to the student’s interest and the faculty member’s field of specialization. A final research paper is required.
SPAN 621-630 Topics in Applied Linguistics and the Pedagogy of Spanish (3 credits)
The courses in this area address different theoretical aspects of Spanish pedagogy, such as learning theories, curriculum planning, interlanguage development, the teaching and learning of phonology, phonetics, grammar, and vocabulary acquisition.
SPAN 631-640 Topics in Spanish Translation (3 credits)
Courses in this thematic area will explore different theoretical aspects of translation, such as languages in contact (bilingualism, interpretation, Chicano/a literature, contrastive grammars), diachronic and synchronic linguistic variation and its representation in time and space, as well as provide students with the opportunity to practice their translation skills.
SPAN 641-650 Topics in Critical Thinking and Theory (3 credits)
Through the study of cultural discourses of the Hispanic world, this thematic area aims to improve the understanding and praxis of rational analysis and argumentation, as well as to examine the intimate relationship between linguistic/language theory and cultural analysis. Topics may include rhetoric, pragmatics and hermeneutics, as well as the analytical practices of a number of linguistic and literary theorists.
SPAN 651-660 Topics in the Subject and Identity (3 credits)
This area examines the artistic, literary and philosophical conceptualizations of subject and identity in the Hispanic world, including the problematics of gender, the (visual) image, the gaze, the body, etc. Topics may include the image of the gendered subject, analyses of dramatic works and film, the ‘visibility’ of the subject in the media, literature and/or paraliterature of a period and/or geographical area.
SPAN 661-670 Topics in Exile and Marginality (3 credits)
This thematic area examines exile as an epistemological, ontological, aesthetic, linguistic and political category within the Hispanic world. Courses may concentrate on writers and/or artists in exile, political and national identity, as well as gender issues in different eras and geographical spaces. Topics may include the examination of discourses of crisis in different eras: modernization; testimonio literature; the boom; the Chicano world and its reality; postmodernism/colonialism.
SPAN 671-680 Topics in History of Ideas in the Hispanic World (3 credits)
This area examines the philosophical and ideological bases of artistic expression in the Hispanic world, in its European, American and Asian contexts. Topics may include the Caliban/Ariel dichotomy in Latin America, the rhetoric of independence and revolution, modernity/postmodernity. Poetic and essayistic discourses of Spain and Spanish America form the corpus for this area.
SPAN 681 Research Seminar (3 credits)
Students meet with peers and faculty for discussion and presentation of their current research.
SPAN 682 Research Paper I (12 credits)
Under the supervision of a faculty member, students undertake a substantial research project, to be completed by the preparation of a research paper.
SPAN 683 Research Paper II (15 credits)
Under the supervision of a faculty member, students undertake a research project, to be completed by the preparation of a research paper.
SPAN 694 Thesis Proposal (3 credits)
Under the supervision of a thesis supervisor, the student writes a proposal presenting a research topic, whose overall goal is to demonstrate that the student is capable of undertaking an independent research project. In the proposal, the student provides: 1) the linguistic, cultural or literary phenomenon or corpus to be studied; 2) a critical and theoretical framework for the study; and 3) a preliminary bibliography. This proposal is submitted to the thesis director and Graduate Program Director for consideration.
SPAN 695 Thesis (24 credits)
The thesis consists of the formulation and presentation of the research results. Each thesis is examined by a committee consisting of the student’s supervisor and at least two other scholars from the department and/or scholars from relevant disciplines in other departments or institutions.
SPAN 698 Topics in Current Research (3 credits)
When offered, content will depend on the theme designated by the program.Students may re-register for this course, provided that the course content has changed. Change in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number.
COMS 800 Integrative Seminar (3 credits)
This course proposes to engage first-year students in an epistemological conversation concerning different approaches to the conceptualization of communication and to the range of research problematics elaborated in the field and in the program. The expected outcomes include: a broad understanding of the relations between different domains within the discipline; the ability to recognize the links between epistemological assumptions, theory construction, the formation of research problematics and methodological approaches; a familiarization with the main fields of strength within the program; and the development of the ability to engage in dialogue with colleagues in different domains of research.
COMS 835 Doctoral Pro-Seminar (3 credits)
Note: Students who have received credit for COMS 830 may not take this course for credit.
Elective Courses
COMS 805 Research Workshop (3 credits)
This research workshop is supervised by the student’s thesis director and is intended to respond to a particular need unfulfilled by the program. It can take various forms, namely a directed readings program, a specific project within a research group, an elective course (including a masters level course) or a research or creation internship. The research workshop must be defined in a specific agreement between the thesis supervisor and the student, which is approved by the program director and added to the student’s file.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a COMS 805 number may not take this course for credit.
COMS 822 Advanced Seminar in Research Methods I (3 credits)
This course provides an in-depth analysis of methodological problematics. Major contemporary methods of analysis are considered. Possible themes include research design, data-gathering techniques and instruments, and qualitative or quantitative procedures for data analysis. Specific topics may vary from year to year.
COMS 823 Advanced Seminar in Research Methods II (3 credits)
Students who have registered for COMS 822 must register for COMS 823 when taking a second Advanced Seminar in Research Methods course.
* Topics vary and are determined by the Joint Program Committee.
COMS 841 Cultural Industries (3 credits)
This course examines commodification and industrialization processes as well as the dissemination and consumption of culture within contemporary social formations, while focusing on one or more sectors of the cultural industries. The analytical approach considers themes such as characteristics of merchandising cycles, work and market organization, symbolic and cultural specificity of cultural-industries products, and relationships between technological innovation and cultural form.
COMS 842 Media Reception (3 credits)
This course examines media reception. It explores different theoretical and methodological approaches to the study of individual group practices and cultural consumption. The course looks at case-study material drawn from specific media or media genres (e.g. popular music, soap operas, children’s programming). The seminar considers such approaches as media ethnography, focus-group research, audience research, life histories, and other context specific micro-social approaches.
COMS 843 Communication Policy (3 credits)
This course examines the history and development of state intervention and regulation of the media. It may focus on communication policy nationally or internationally. The course considers such issues as the role of public policy in the development of public media and the public sphere, models of regulation and deregulation, the relations between regulatory agencies and interest groups, and the position of communication policies within larger governmental structures.
COMS 844 Uses of Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs) (3 credits)
Observing usage of information and communication objects and technical devices allows us to understand the effect of technologies within society. This course explores different theoretical and methodological approaches pertinent to analyzing ICT usages. With respect to course discussions and papers, particular attention may be paid to the interaction between user and technical device; articulation between artifact user and creator; usage situation within the organizational context; embedding of political dimensions in technological design; usage micro-situations and macro-sociological issues. Some major research traditions may be introduced, namely, dissemination of artifacts, sociotechnical innovation, common practices and significations, pragmatic approaches, social and socio-political appropriation of usages.
COMS 851 Speech Communication (3 credits)
This course examines discourse as action. Forms of discourse considered may range from interpersonal communication to public address. Possible theoretical approaches include ethnomethodology, conversational analysis, rhetorical theory, and performance studies.
COMS 853 Discourse and Representation (3 credits)
The course examines discourse with respect to representation. It focuses on the structuring of knowledge and identity within sign systems. Emphasis may range from the cognitive and psychological to the social and cultural.
COMS 854 Discourse within Social Formations (3 credits)
This course examines discourse as social mediation. Possible themes include the interrelation of power and knowledge, the organization of culture through signifying practices, and the production of discourse and social institutions.
COMS 861 Organizational Culture (3 credits)
This course examines how cultural analysis can be brought to bear in understanding organizational life. To this end, a range of theoretical approaches are drawn upon, including conversational analysis, ethnography, ethnomethodology, symbolic interactionism, enactment theory, and socio-linguistics. Aspects of organizations such as norms, rituals, folklore, traditions, common ideals, ideologies, shared symbols, core values and interaction are given particular attention.
COMS 864 Communication and Change in Organizations (3 credits)
This course addresses a major question within organizations at both theoretical and practical levels. It focuses on issues of innovation or transformation in an organizational framework using various approaches (functionalist, critical, post-modern, constructivist, interpretative). This perspective is pertinent for analyzing the context and process of change within cultural or development organizations as well as private, public or charitable undertakings.
COMS 873 Identities and Cultural Exchange (3 credits)
Within the context of electronic, information, and market-globalization forces, traditional geopolitical borders have become porous and easily penetrable. This course focuses on the hybrid identities emergent and negotiated from cross-cultural engagements and transnational communication at the beginning of the 21st century. Curricular materials include theoretical readings, case studies, and audiovisual materials focused on bridging cultural and political gaps.
COMS 874 Globalization of Communication (3 credits)
This course examines the emergence of a global communication system. Possible topics include international information flow, the circulation of communication products and communication issues as they are reflected in international accords and debates, and the role of media in issues of cultural development, democratization, and resistance to globalization.
COMS 875 Technology and Organization (3 credits)
This course analyzes and critiques various theoretical approaches which account for the relationship between technology and organization. It also provides the grounds for a communicational reflection on phenomena associated with the presence of information and communication technologies within organizations.
COMS 876 Media Technology as Practice (3 credits)
This course examines relationships between theory and practice in the work of individuals and groups of media practitioners across a range of genres and working contexts. Analysis can focus on the organization of the workplace, the creative process and social forces influencing media praxis.
COMS 877 International Communication and Development (3 credits)
This course traces the history of the different paradigms related to communication and development. It proposes a critical analysis of the theoretical perspectives suggested in both Southern and Northern contexts. The topics considered include Canadian and foreign institutions, policies, and programs, the role of international fora, as well as globalization and development. Case studies may focus on a specific region of the world.
COMS 878 Communication, Conflict and Peace (3 credits)
This course examines the various ways in which discourses of war, conflict, and peace are constructed and relayed through the mass media and other forms of technologically-mediated communication. In particular, how do the inherent properties of different modes of communication intersect with larger discursive formations to reproduce dominant definitions and unquestioned categories of social knowledge related to issues of peace and conflict? What role do the media play in shaping our understanding of war and warfare? How does the internet contribute to promoting both conflict and peace? How is peace represented as an end state that is desirable; for whom is peace being constructed; and what are the kinds of actions being promoted or encouraged in the name of peace?
COMS 879 Human-Computer Interactions (3 credits)
This seminar examines human-computer interaction models and research in various fields of media communication; virtual worlds, e-commerce, distance education, sharing of knowledge and resources, adaptive technologies, systems intelligence and customization. Other topics include principles of interface design and assessment in cognitive ergonomics.
COMS 880 Communication Networks and Organization (3 credits)
This course examines and analyzes communication networks in a constructivist perspective with respect to two main “social-networks” traditions (anthropological and structural). It considers communication networks according to the themes explored by scholars in the field such as diffusion, social support and capital, organizational phenomena, social movements or ICTs. The seminar also includes methodological aspects of the study of communication networks, their emergence, and their transformation.
COMS 882 Communication, Democracy and Power (3 credits)
This course considers the communicative structure and performance of democracy within modern society. Attention is paid to the discursive resources available to perform and affect democracy, the constitution of democratic agents, the role of media in constituting and maintaining a public sphere, communicative strategies, norms of regulation and power, the performance of difference and various aspects of public culture.
COMS 883 History and Historiography of Media and Culture (3 credits)
This course examines the development of communication technologies and the media in comparative and historical perspective. Themes of time, space, place and power and their reconfiguration in relation to media and communication are given particular attention. Class members are encouraged to think about how they might engage in research on the history of media as part of their dissertation projects. To this end, historiographical issues are examined throughout the course, along with methodological consideration given to how one works with documentary and archival records.
COMS 884 Cultural Theory in Communication Studies (3 credits)
This course introduces students to cultural studies and its entwinement with the development of the field of communications. Key readings in Marxist approaches to culture, British Cultural Studies, and its US and Canadian variants are covered in the first half of the course. The remaining weeks expand the national and conceptual specificity of the “cultural studies tradition.” Topics include cultural and representational politics, issues of identity, resistance, hegemony, and ideology.
COMS 885 Popular Culture (3 credits)
This course focuses upon the political dimension of popular culture and the intellectual challenges it poses to scholarship. It concentrates upon the conceptual and historical aspects of the study of popular-cultural forms, their production and consumption, as well as their assessment. The course introduces key ideas and issues in popular-cultural studies, beginning with the rise of interest in mass culture during the late-19th and early-20th centuries. It also encounters modes of examining and understanding popular texts and sites of popular consumption. Issues of subjectivity, community, ideology, cultural hierarchies, and mass society are addressed.
COMS 886 Alternative Media (3 credits)
This course examines the array of alternative communication practices that inform social movements emerging from the margins. It focuses on the conditions of their effectiveness and mechanisms that facilitate or impede their success, such as the external social forces that influence their cooptation, commodification and evacuation of revolutionary potential.
COMS 887 Strategies and Styles in Communication (3 credits)
This course considers the strategies and styles of communication as intentional symbolic activity. Communication is examined as a practice that responds to and transforms situations and contexts. Emphasis is placed on the form, manner, and consequences of such practices, as well as on the major paradigms informing different approaches to the study of discourse and mediated messages.
COMS 888 Discourses of the Body (3 credits)
Critical theorists have identified the body as a site of competing and multiple discourses. The course examines some of the ways in which different bodies have been constructed in the media and how these both constrain and provide latitude for the expression of identities. A central area of inquiry is the context of the historical and contemporary terrain that informs the expression and categorization of these identities.
COMS 889 Theories of Organizational Communication (3 credits)
This course surveys and juxtaposes how some of the main approaches to organizational studies have dealt with issues related to communication. Paradigms considered may include scientific management, human relations, cybernetics, political economy, rational decision making, cultural studies, feminism, and post-modernism. An effort is made to examine how these various approaches emerged historically in relation to shifting patterns of power, inequality, and technological change. Issues such as the nature of bureaucracy, domination and resistance, systematically distorted communication, and public relations/external communication are addressed.
COMS 891 Communication Technologies and Society (3 credits)
This course introduces students to and contextualizes the main paradigms with respect to research on social, economic and cultural aspects of information and communication technologies. Critical analysis focuses on their epistemological assumptions and premises, main categories of analysis, and privileged issues. Attention is paid to the political economy of the information system.
COMS 892 Epistemology and Methodology of Media Creation (3 credits)
This seminar seeks to develop a position of poiesis (production) and to differentiate it from the position of aisthesis (reception). In order to define the multiple aspects of media creation, the following themes are discussed: creationistic accounts and theses; the spectacle as ritual, achievement and imitation of reality; agents, machines and living organisms; functions of transmitting information and storytelling. Operational concepts considered may include granularity, linearity, interactivity, diegesis, spatialization, indexicalization and enunciation.
COMS 893 Advanced Seminar in Special Topics in the PhD in Communication (3 credits)
This seminar permits the in-depth examination of particular special topics in media and communication. Topics vary from year to year.
Examinations and Thesis Work
COMS 815 Doctoral Examination (3 credits)
COMS 890 Doctoral Thesis Proposal (6 credits)
COMS 896 Doctoral Thesis Research (63 credits)
COMS 695 Thesis (21 credits)
Prerequisite: COMS 694.
The thesis is researched and written in the Fall and Winter of the second year of study. It is submitted in written form and is between 20,000 and 25,000 words in length. The thesis format must be commensurate with Graduate Studies regulations and in a format stipulated by the rules of the Thesis Office. The thesis submission normally follows the graduate academic calendar dates. The thesis is defended in an oral examination.
COMS 697 Research-Creation Thesis (21 credits)
Prerequisite: COMS 694.
Specifically designed for students with significant media production experience. During the Fall and Winter of the second year of study, students choosing Option III undertake a Research-Creation Thesis that deploys one or more media forms. The Research-Creation Thesis is comprised of an original media production or prototype in any genre, and a 10,000 word document comprising a literature and media review, a theoretical and methodological contextualization, a critical reflection on the research-creation and its outcomes, and other areas of analysis as deemed necessary by the student and the student’s Thesis Committee. The thesis submission normally follows the graduate academic calendar dates. The thesis is defended in an oral examination.
COMS 698 Major Research Paper (15 credits)
Prerequisite: COMS 600, 605, 610, plus 21 elective credits.
The Major Research Paper is an extended essay/project equivalent to 10,000 words on a topic chosen in consultation with a full-time faculty member. The Major Research Paper may commence from topics and materials from previous courses, it may involve a sustained literature review of a specific issue or problem, or it may be a thematic investigation of a topic pertaining to media or communication studies. With permission of the supervisor and the Graduate Program Director, the Major Research Paper may include a research-creation component. This course is available only to those registered in Option IV, is normally taken in term five, and may not be taken concurrently with other courses.
Note: Students who have received credit for COMS 695 or 697 may not take this course for credit.
ECON 805 Doctoral Comprehensive Examination (6 credits)
ECON 806 Doctoral Research Seminar (6 credits)
ECON 807 Doctoral Thesis (48 credits)
ECON 814 Workshop in Advanced Economic Theory
Prerequisite: Permission of the department.
The workshop is designed for PhD students who have successfully completed their comprehensive examinations and have expressed an interest in Economic Theory. The course involves lectures by participating faculty members and continues with presentations by students. These presentations may involve the student’s own work or an already published paper of great importance to the literature. Topics vary from year to year, with some years devoted to micro-topics and others to macro-topics.
Note: Students who have received credit for this course under ECON 614 may not take this course for credit.
ECON 817 Advanced Macro Theory
Prerequisite: ECON 616.
The course deals with the New Classical and New Keynesian macroeconomics, rational expectations and disequilibrium approaches. Emphasis is placed on model solution techniques, optimal control theory, and stochastic processes. Recent developments in empirical estimation will also be dealt with.
Note: Students who have received credit for ECON 617 may not take this course for credit.
ECON 858 Montreal Natural Resources and Environmental Economics Workshop
Prerequisite: Permission of the department.
This workshop, which is organized through the Centre Interuniversitaire de Recherche en Economie Quantiative (CIREQ), is intended for researchers and doctoral students in economics throughout Montreal who are interested in resource and environmental economics. The types of topics that may be dealt with, at an advanced level, are the economic theory of sustainable growth, green accounting, sunk costs and production constraints in natural resource exploitation, the irreversibility of environmental investment decisions, measures of biodiversity and their implications, the optimal order of extraction of natural resources, intertemporal depletion of spatially distributed nonrenewable resources, property rights and natural resource exploitation, applications of differential games to natural resource and environmental economics, and other related topics. The workshop is led by a team of researchers comprising professors from McGill University, Concordia University, Université de Montréal and HEC Montréal who will actively participate in each meeting. A regular and active participation is expected of the doctoral students and other researchers who would like to join this work group.
ECON 878 Workshop in Labour Economics
Prerequisite: Permission of the department.
The course covers topics related to specifying and estimating static and dynamic models of individual choice concerning education, occupation, labour supply, marriage, fertility, and immigration. Emphasis is placed on policy evaluation methods. The course covers both structural and nonstructural approaches. For each topic, theory, econometrics and applications are discussed. The course concludes with presentations by students of their on-going thesis work. The course is restricted to PhD students who plan to write a thesis in the field of labour economics. There is no textbook for this course. Instead, the course uses journal articles extensively to supplement the topics covered in the workshop.
ECON 703 Master’s Research Paper (21 credits)
Cognate Courses
In addition, graduate students in economics may be permitted to register for a limited number of courses offered in the MSc program in the John Molson School of Business. In all such cases, prior permission of the Department of Economics and the John Molson School of Business is required.
ECON 596 Natural Resource Economics (3 credits)
This course focuses on the problems of the finiteness of the natural resources base in Canada and in the world, and on an analysis of the demand for and supply of natural resources and energy. The course also discusses the economic aspects of a selected group of conservation measures (financial incentives, reallocation of property rights, regulation).
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a ECON 598 number may not take this course for credit.
EDUC 806 - Quantitative Methods (3 credits)
EDUC 807 - Qualitative Methods (3 credits)
EDUC 808 - Reporting Research (3 credits)
EDUC 809 - Advanced Issues in Education (3 credits)
9 credits of elective courses
EDUC 890 - Comprehensive Examination (12 credits)
Each candidate must successfully complete EDUC 890 before being admitted to candidacy for the degree. The comprehensive consists of a written and oral examination that tests the candidate on both general and area specific research. After successfully completing the comprehensive examination, the student is admitted to candidacy for the degree.
EDUC 891 - Doctoral Proposal (9 credits)
Note: the proposal is accepted only after the student is admitted to candidacy.
EDUC 895 - Doctoral Dissertation (48 credits).
A doctoral thesis is expected to make an original contribution to knowledge, and be presented in acceptable literary form.
Academic Regulations
Academic Standing. Please refer to the Academic Standing section of the Calendar for a detailed review of the Academic Regulations.
Residence. The minimum period of residence is two years (6 terms) of full-time study beyond the master’s degree, or the equivalent in part-time study. A minimum of one year of full-time study is highly recommended.
Time Limit. Please refer to the Academic Regulation page for further details regarding the Time Limit requirements.
Graduation Requirement. To graduate, students must have a cumulative GPA of at least 3.00.
Courses
Required Courses
Each course is worth 3 credits unless otherwise indicated.
EDUC 806 Quantitative Methods
Prerequisite: ETEC 641, or CHST 605 or permission of instructor.
This course builds students' capacity to conduct quantitative research in education at the doctoral level. It covers all topics related to experimental and quasi-experimental design and the application of univariate statistics to educational research problems. In doing so, the course addresses the basic theory underlying quantitative approaches, selection of an initial research question, the types of questions best suited to quantitative methods, managing and analyzing quantitative data, external and internal validity, reliability and objectivity. This course also provides opportunities to analyze quantitative data.
Note: Students who have received credit for EDUC 802 may not take this course for credit.
EDUC 807 Qualitative Methods
This course builds students’ capacity to conduct qualitative research in education at the doctoral level. It covers various types of qualitative research, such as ethnography, case studies, content analysis, and naturalistic observation. In doing so, the course addresses the basic theory and philosophy underlying qualitative approaches, selection of an initial research question, the types of questions best suited to qualitative methods, managing qualitative data, qualitative data analysis, and assuring the credibility and trustworthiness of qualitative data.
Note: Students who have received credit for EDUC 802 may not take this course for credit.
EDUC 808 Reporting Research
This course prepares students to report their research to various stakeholders of educational research, including funding agencies, other researchers, journal editors, policy makers, and the public. Students prepare various research-related documents, and provide peer reviews.
Note: Students who have received credit for EDUC 800 may not take this course for credit.
EDUC 809 Advanced Issues in Education
This seminar explores one or more complex issues of education that has implications for Applied Linguistics, Child Studies, Educational Studies, and Educational Technology. During the course, students explore the research and popular literature on the topic, critically examine the epistemological, sociological, and theoretical bases of the literature, and relate the lessons learned to their own proposed research projects.
Note: Students who have received credit for EDUC 801 or EDUC 805 may not take this course for credit.
EDUC 890 Comprehensive Examination (12 credits)
EDUC 891 Doctoral Proposal (9 credits)
EDUC 895 Doctoral Dissertation (48 credits)
Area Tutorials
The content and format of an area tutorial may vary from year to year, depending on the number of students and the availability of faculty members. All area tutorials involve directed reading, research, seminar presentations, and discussion sessions on selected topics within that problem area.
Area tutorials offered by the Department of Education fall into the following categories:
EDUC 810-824 Educational Technology Area Tutorials
EDUC 825-839 Child Studies Area Tutorials
EDUC 840-854 Educational Studies Area Tutorials
EDUC 855-869 Applied Linguistics Area Tutorials
Each course is worth 3 credits unless otherwise indicated.
EDUC 810-824 Educational Technology Area Tutorials
Area tutorials in Educational Technology are selected from topics related to the application of technology to education and training. These include Human Performance Technology (HPT); theory, development and research in educational media; distance education; educational cybernetics, systems analysis and design; and human resources development.
EDUC 825-839 Child Studies Area Tutorials
Area tutorials in Child Studies are selected from topics that focus on children’s typical and atypical learning and development (e.g., social or cognitive development), in a variety of settings and contexts (e.g., early childhood environments, schools, after-school programs, recreation and community settings, families and peers, special education environments).
EDUC 840-854 Educational Studies Area Tutorials
Area tutorials in Educational Studies consist of philosophical, historical, social psychological, sociological and anthropological aspects of education locally, nationally, and internationally. These may include, but are not limited to, comparative study or early childhood education thought and practice, multicultural education, policy and practice in diverse school settings, curriculum issues and indigenous knowledge, mediated learning environments, curriculum theory, moral education, issues of difference in sexual orientation, class, race, and gender.
EDUC 855-869 Applied Linguistics Area Tutorials
Area tutorials in Applied Linguistics consist of a variety of topics related to second-language learning and teaching. More specifically they may focus on interlanguage development; teaching of pronunciation; role of routinization in language acquisition; acquisition of second language vocabulary; teaching and learning of second language phonology.
APLI 604 Applied Language Studies (3 credits)
This course examines the different theoretical concepts and methods used to analyze and describe the linguistic structure of language, and explores ways in which these can be applied to the teaching of second languages. The course introduces students to the key concepts that characterize the different components of language, namely phonology, morphology, syntax and semantics, within an approach that recognizes that languages can be affected by the social, psychological, and pragmatic aspects of human behaviour.
APLI 621 Issues in Second Language Acquisition (3 credits)
Research in second language acquisition (SLA) is surveyed in this course. Students read, critique, and discuss a number of research reports and survey articles on topics including research techniques in SLA, individual differences believed to affect success in second language learning (e.g., age, motivation), the systematicity of learner language (interlanguage, developmental sequences), the influence of learners’ first language on the structure of their interlanguage, the development of general theories of SLA. The course concludes with a discussion of SLA research carried out in classroom settings.
APLI 660 Research Methods I (3 credits)
The principal aims of the course are to enable students better to evaluate reports of empirical research in the language sciences and to plan limited studies of their own. Emphasis is placed upon the logic of research designs, the nature of scientific proof, and the assumptions underlying data analytic procedures. Case studies of published research, readings and lectures illustrate the concepts of data, scales, models, sampling, theory, description, estimation and significance testing.
Cluster Courses
Thesis students take a minimum of one course from each cluster; non-thesis students take a minimum of two courses from each cluster.
Cluster A: Focus on Theory
APLI 623 Sociolinguistic Aspects of Bilingualism and Multilingualism
This course is an introduction to educational and sociolinguistic issues affecting the promotion and maintenance of individual and societal bilingualism, multilingualism, and multiculturalism. The societal consequences of being multilingual and multicultural and the perspectives of both students and educators in multilingual/multicultural language classrooms will be examined.
Note: Students who have received credit for APLI 642 may not take this course for credit.
APLI 624 Psycholinguistic Aspects of Second Language Acquisition
Prerequisite: APLI 660 (previously or concurrently).
This course examines issues in second language acquisition and bilingualism/multilingualism from a cognitive (psycholinguistic) perspective. The aim of the course is to familiarize students with basic psycholinguistic concepts of language representation and use, focusing on the learning of different aspects of language, the role of attention and memory in language acquisition, the development of language comprehension and production skills, and the cognitive consequences of bilingualism/multilingualism. Throughout the course, emphasis is given to understanding research methodologies used in psycholinguistic investigations.
Note: Students who have received credit for APLI 642 may not take this course for credit.
APLI 626 Variationist Second Language Acquisition
The acquisition of a second language is a process that is inherently variable due to factors such as the influence of the learner’s first language, the target language, extralinguistic variables, and other factors. This course examines the interplay of these variables, focusing on current research in variable second language acquisition and on the pedagogical implications and applications of this knowledge for second language teaching.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under an APLI 651 number may not take this course for credit.
APLI 627 Individual Differences in Second Language Acquisition
The course provides an overview of learners’ individual differences in cognitive, social, affective, and motivational variables and the role of those differences in second language teaching and learning. Course topics may include language aptitude, motivation, learning and cognitive styles, personality, and language learning strategies. The course offers a research-based framework for understanding how individual differences impact language learning for different learners in various learning contexts.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under an APLI 651 number may not take this course for credit.
APLI 634 Cross-Linguistic Influence
Prerequisite: APLI 604.
This course provides an overview of different perspectives that have been taken on the ways previously learned languages affect the learning of subsequent languages. Topics include: the contrastive analysis and error analysis approaches; avoidance; markedness; selective, bidirectional, and conceptual transfer; and factors affecting cross-linguistic influence among trilingual and multilingual speakers. Throughout the course, the implications for language teaching of the theoretical perspectives and empirical findings are considered.
Cluster B: Focus on Language
APLI 601 Phonological Aspects of Second Language Acquisition
Prerequisite: APLI 604 (previously or concurrently).
This course is an introduction to second language phonology, with emphasis on how theoretical knowledge and research can be applied to the teaching of pronunciation in traditional and computer-based environments. This course familiarizes students with the English sound system and associated phonetic phenomena, research in the development of second language phonology, and key concepts in phonemic representation, production and perception.
APLI 610 Teaching and Learning Second Language Vocabulary
Prerequisite: APLI 604 (previously or concurrently).
The course provides an overview of research perspectives on second language vocabulary acquisition. Topics include the characteristics of lexis, the structure of the mental lexicon, implicit and explicit learning, and issues in assessment. The course also outlines a research-informed approach to instruction: in addition to examining both old and new techniques for teaching vocabulary, it explores developments in corpus linguistics that are relevant to vocabulary instruction and materials design.
APLI 616 Pedagogical Grammar
Prerequisite: APLI 604 (previously or concurrently).
This course surveys the theoretical and empirical literature related to the teaching and learning of grammar in second language classrooms. Topics include the nature of pedagogical rules, the use of metalinguistic terminology, teachers’ knowledge and beliefs, learner characteristics, task types, and sequencing. Students also study a grammar structure in depth for which they subsequently develop, pilot, and critically evaluate a set of instructional materials.
APLI 636 Language Awareness
This course focuses on current research and practice in language awareness relating to language teaching and learning for a variety of learners in different contexts. Topics may include the learning of first, second and additional languages, language teaching methodology, language teacher education, attitudes towards language, cross-linguistic and cross-cultural awareness, and critical language awareness. Throughout the course, emphasis is placed on both the theoretical and practical implications of language awareness.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under an APLI 651 number may not take this course for credit.
APLI 643 Pragmatics and Second Language Acquisition
The course provides an overview of pragmatics, which includes topics ranging from reference, implicature, presupposition, speech acts, information structure, and conversational structure. The course also provides a research-informed approach to the study of these topics in second language learning contexts, exploring developments in second language research that are relevant to the understanding of pragmatics.
Cluster C: Focus on Pedagogy
APLI 625 Second Language Speaking and Listening
The course provides an overview of several topics in second language listening and speaking such as fluency, formulaic language, strategies, and inferencing. The course provides a research-informed approach to second language listening and speaking, exploring trends in second language acquisition research and pedagogy that are relevant to the understanding of skill development.
APLI 630 Second Language Syllabus Design and Curriculum Planning
The aims of the course are to examine the evolution of the syllabus in second language teaching and to consider issues related to the development, planning and implementation of language programs in a range of educational settings. Topics include the history of second language teaching; current issues in pedagogical practice; assessment of student needs; and the design, sequencing, and evaluation of language teaching materials.
Note: Students who have received credit for APLI 638 may not take this course for credit.
APLI 635 Language Assessment
The course provides an overview of theory and research that informs language testing. Students explore historical developments in language assessment as well as current trends. The course enables them to critically evaluate a range of test types including standardized placement instruments, diagnostic tests, progress/achievement measures, and non-traditional assessment techniques. Students are guided in designing sample tests; they are also familiarized with established methods for analyzing test items and interpreting results.
APLI 644 Technology in Language Learning
This course explores theoretical and applied issues related to the use of technology in second language learning and teaching. The principal aims of the course are to enable students to critically evaluate existing instructional uses of technology and to design methodologically sound technology-based materials for second language teaching. Emphasis is placed on developing skills needed for the integration of instructional technology into second language instruction.
APLI 646 Literacy (3 credits)
This course examines the development of reading and writing abilities in a second language, including the connections between the two. It discusses literacy issues pertaining to different age groups and proficiency levels, including university students acquiring advanced academic writing skills. Throughout the course, the implications for language teaching of the different theoretical and empirical findings will be considered.
APLI 647 Supervision of Practice Teaching
This course is designed for students who have some ESL teaching experience and a particular interest in working in the field of teacher training. The course has both a practical and a theoretical component. In the practical component, students observe and assist novice ESL teachers; in the theoretical component, students meet weekly in an academic seminar.
Elective Courses
Each year the department offers a selection of courses from those listed below. All courses are worth 3 credits unless otherwise noted.
APLI 641 Research Methods II
Prerequisite: APLI 660.
The principal aims of the course are to enable students to evaluate the statistical information provided in reports of empirical research in the social sciences and use statistics in small scale studies. Emphasis is placed upon the logic of statistical tests, the assumptions underlying their use, and the interpretation of the results. The course also includes basic elements of data analysis and synthesis in research employing qualitative methodologies.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under an APLI 651 number may not take this course for credit.
APLI 651 Special Topics in Applied Linguistics
This course provides an advanced treatment of specialized literature in an area of Applied Linguistics.
APLI 671 Reading Course in Applied Linguistics I
APLI 672 Reading Course in Applied Linguistics II
APLI 673 Reading Course in Applied Linguistics III
APLI 674 Reading Course in Applied Linguistics IV
APLI 675 Reading Course in Applied Linguistics V (6 credits)
Thesis
APLI 690 Thesis Proposal (3 credits)
APLI 691 Thesis (18 credits)
APLI 696 Research Paper (12 credits)
CHST 695 Internship Seminar and Field Placement (9 credits)
Prerequisite: CHST 605 and CHST 606, or equivalent.
The internship is designed to provide students with the opportunity to investigate an applied problem or topical issue in child studies. Course requirements include a seminar in both terms. In the first term, students are required to keep a journal, conduct on-site observations, and formulate a written proposal for the internship project. In the second term, students will conduct their project and maintain their journal. Students are required to spend a minimum of 75 hours in the field placement in the first term and an additional 125 hours (minimum) in their second term.
CHST 696 Internship Report (9 credits)
The final report is a detailed record of the internship project and includes a description and analysis of all work produced for the field placement. In addition, all instruments, curricular materials, journal entries, and other supporting documents are included in the final report.
Thesis Option
CHST 697 Thesis Proposal (3 credits)
Under the supervision of a thesis supervisor, the student writes a proposal presenting a research topic; the overall goal of which is to demonstrate that the student is capable of undertaking an independent research project.
CHST 698 Research and Thesis (18 credits)
The thesis consists of the formulation and presentation of the research results which are then defended before a committee consisting of the student’s supervisor and at least two other scholars from the department and/or scholars from relevant disciplines in other departments or institutions.
ESTU 690 Thesis and Tutorial (21 credits)
ESTU 692 Directed Study (with Extended Essay or Research Project) (12 credits)
ETEC 613 Learning Theories (3 credits)
The primary goal of the course is for students to develop a critical understanding of classic and contemporary theories of learning, such as behaviourism, cognitivism, neo-cognitivism, and socio-constructivism as they inform instructional practice. Secondary course goals include enhancing students' abilities to: a) read and evaluate the primary literature in the area; b) present and write within the discipline; c) evaluate applications of theory to practice; and d) collaborate professionally including via computer conferencing.
ETEC 640 Research Methods I (3 credits)
This course provides an introduction to research methodologies germane to the field of educational technology.  Students acquire competencies in analyzing, synthesizing and evaluating empirical research that employ quantitative, qualitative and mixed methodologies.  Special emphasis is placed on acquiring skills to critique and review literature in educational technology.
Note: Students who have recieved credit for ETEC 548/648 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 641 Research Methods II (3 credits)
Prerequisite: ETEC 640.
The principal aims of the course are to enable students to evaluate the statistical information provided in reports of empirical research in the social sciences and use statistics in small scale studies. Emphasis is placed upon the logic of statistical tests, the assumptions underlying their use, and the interpretation of the results. The course also includes basic elements of data analysis and synthesis in research employing qualitative methodologies.
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 548/648 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 650 Fundamentals of Instructional Design (3 credits)
This course introduces students to instructional design, which refers to both the systematic process for preparing learning materials as well as to the theories and principles that guide that work. Working on a real-world project, students directly engage in the process and prepare an instructional program.
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 512/712 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 651 Fundamentals of Human Performance Technology (3 credits)
Prerequisite: ETEC 650.
Building on the base of instructional design, this course introduces human performance technology (HPT). HPT is a set of principles and methods for identifying and solving problems that cannot be solved through instructional programs alone.  Working on a real-world project, students design a variety of non-instructional interventions.
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 512/712 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 671 Administering Educational Technology Groups (3 credits)
This course prepares students to integrate into the real-world practice of educational technology and to eventually assume leadership positions in organizations.  Through readings, experiential learning activities, and other assignments, this course introduces students to the basic themes of administering educational technology groups:  (a) business management—successfully competing for work and resources needed to complete it; (b) project management—planning work and overseeing its progress; and (c) people management—establishing and managing expectations of, and relationships with, members of the group.
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 591/701 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 672 Project Management (3 credits)
This course focuses on project management and its application to the fields of education and training.  Special attention is placed on the different components of a project, but reviews of project management as a discipline, a process and a system are also undertaken. Following the established methodology proposed by national and international project management organizations, this course introduces the processes, skills, techniques and software tools required to effectively manage a project.  Specific educational examples and cases of real-life projects are included in the course to describe how project management techniques can be used in education and training.
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 594/704 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 673 Consulting Skills for Educational Technologists (3 credits)
Prerequisite: ETEC 650.
This course prepares educational technologists to adopt the consultative approach that is central to the profession. Specifically, this course develops the key competencies needed in consultative work in schools, higher education, workplace learning groups and non-profit organizations. These competencies include building awareness of the client organization, supporting clients in making effective choices, developing agreements with clients that include the scope, schedule and budget of projects, managing project communications and changes throughout a project, and interacting effectively with clients.
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 573 or for this topic under an ETEC 593/693 number may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 791 Internship (Non-Thesis Option) (15 credits)
ETEC 792 Internship Report (Non-Thesis Option) (3 credits)
ETEC 795 Thesis Proposal (3 credits)
ETEC 796 Thesis or Thesis-Equivalent (15 credits)
Elective Courses
The department currently offers the courses listed below. Each course is worth 3 credits unless otherwise indicated. The pattern of courses offered may vary from year to year. Detailed information on the courses offered in a given year is available from the department.
ETEC 607 Philosophical Issues in Educational Research
Note: Students who have received credit for ADIP 501 or ESTU 601 or ETEC 507 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 621 Educational Cybernetics
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 506/606 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 635 Principles of Educational Message Design
ETEC 636 Evaluation in Education and Training
ETEC 637 Educational Gaming and Modelling
ETEC 652 Knowledge Management
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 567/667 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 660 Introduction to Educational Computing
ETEC 662 Social Technologies and the Sociocultural Aspects of Learning
ETEC 665 Introduction to Digital Media in Education
ETEC 666 Comtemporary Use of Simulation in Training and Education
ETEC 669 Designing and Developing Interactive Instruction
ETEC 676 Human Resources Development
ETEC 680 Global Perspectives in E-Learning
Note: Students who have have received credit for ETEC 555/655 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 681 Fundamentals of Distance Education
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 592/702 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 690 Field Experience (for Option A-Thesis/Thesis-Equivalent only)
ETEC 691 Advanced Readings and Research in Educational Technology I
ETEC 692 Advanced Readings and Research in Educational Technology II
ETEC 693 Special Issues in Educational Technology
Cognate Courses
Graduate students in educational technology may be permitted to register for up to two elective courses (6 credits) offered in other graduate programs. In all such cases, prior permission of the Graduate Program Director is required.
ETEC 513 Learning Theories (3 credits)
The primary goal of the course is for students to develop a critical understanding of classic and contemporary theories of learning, such as behaviourism, cognitivism, neo-cognitivism, and socio-constructivism as they inform instructional practice. Secondary course goals include enhancing students' abilities to: a) read and evaluate the primary literature in the area; b) present and write within the discipline; c) evaluate applications of theory to practice; and d) collaborate professionally including via computer conferencing.
ETEC 550 Fundamentals of Instructional Design (3 credits)
This course introduces students to instructional design, which refers to both the systematic process for preparing learning materials as well as to the theories and principles that guide that work.  Working on a real-world project, students directly engage in the process and prepare an instructional program.
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 512/712 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 551 Fundamentals of Human Performance Technology (3 credits)
Prerequisite: ETEC 550.
Building on the base of instructional design, this course introduces human performance technology (HPT). HPT is a set of principles and methods for identifying and solving problems that cannot be solved through instructional programs alone. Working on a real-world project, students design a variety of non-instructional interventions.
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 512/712 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 571 Administering Educational Technology Groups (3 credits)
This course prepares students to integrate into the real-world practice of educational technology and to eventually assume leadership positions in organizations. Through readings, experiential learning activities, and other assignments, this course introduces students to the basic themes of administering educational technology groups: (a) business management—successfully competing for work and resources needed to complete it; (b) project management—planning work and overseeing its progress; and (c) people management—establishing and managing expectations of, and relationships with, members of the group.
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 591/701 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 572 Project Management (3 credits)
This course focuses on project management and its application to the fields of education and training. Special attention is made on the different components of a project, but reviews of project management as a discipline, a process and a system are also undertaken. Following the established methodology proposed by national and international project management organizations, this course introduces the processes, skills, techniques and software tools required to effectively manage a project. Specific educational examples and cases of real-life projects are included in the course to describe how project management techniques can be used in education and training.
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 594/704 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 573 Consulting Skills for Educational Technologists (3 credits)
Prerequisite: ETEC 550.
This course prepares educational technologists to adopt the consultative approach that is central to the profession. Specifically, this course develops the key competencies needed in consultative work in schools, higher education, workplace learning groups and non-profit organizations. These competencies include building awareness of the client organization, supporting clients in making effective choices, developing agreements with clients that include the scope, schedule and budget of projects, managing project communications and changes throughout a project, and interacting effectively with clients.
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 673 or for this topic under an ETEC 593/693 number may not take this course for credit.
Elective Courses
The department currently offers the courses listed below. Each course is worth 3 credits unless otherwise indicated. The pattern of courses offered may vary from year to year. Detailed information on the courses offered in a given year is available from the department.
ETEC 507 Philosophical Issues in Educational Research
There are a number of important philosophical questions that lie behind the everyday practice of education research. The questions include: What does it mean to say that research in education is “scientific”? Is science (and, by extension, educational research) really value neutral and objective? What kinds of education research should count as legitimate? In the first part of the course, various definitions of science, for example, those of Karl Popper and Thomas Kuhn, and some influential critiques of the scientific enterprise are examined. In the second part of the course, some of the ongoing debates about appropriate research methods in education are analyzed.
Note: Students who have received credit for ADIP 501 or ESTU 601 or ETEC 607 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 521 Educational Cybernetics
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 506/606 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 535 Principles of Educational Message Design
ETEC 536 Evaluation in Education and Training
ETEC 537 Educational Gaming and Modelling
ETEC 540 Research Methods I
This course provides an introduction to research methodologies germane to the field of educational technology. Students acquire competencies in analyzing, synthesizing and evaluating empirical research that employ quantitative, qualitative and mixed methodologies. Special emphasis is placed on acquiring skills to critique and review literature in educational technology.
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 548/648 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 541 Research Methods II
Prerequisite: ETEC 540.
In this course students develop a proposal, design a pilot study to investigate a research problem, and later analyze the data. Projects may use quantative or qualitative methodologies.
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 548/648 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 552 Knowledge Management
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 567/667 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 560 Introduction to Educational Computing
ETEC 562 Social Technologies and the Sociocultural Aspects of Learning
ETEC 565 Introduction to Digital Media in Education
ETEC 566 Comtemporary Use of Simulation in Training and Education
ETEC 569 Designing and Developing Interactive Instruction
ETEC 576 Human Resources Development
ETEC 580 Global Perspectives in E-Learning
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 555/655 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 581 Fundamentals of Distance Education
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 592/702 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 590 Field Experience
ETEC 593 Special Issues in Educational Technology
ENGL 800 Pro-Seminar I: Theory (3 credits)
This course is an advanced survey of literary theory, considering those thinkers whose work has been particularly influential for the discipline’s understanding of the nature and function of literature and its production. Figures to be studied may include Aristotle, Sidney, Nietzsche, Althusser, Lacan, Derrida, Barthes, Foucault, Deleuze, Irigaray, McLuhan, Badiou, Zizek, and Kristeva.
ENGL 801 Pro-Seminar II: Methodology (3 credits)
This course considers literary research under the aegis of a current or emergent methodological paradigm in the field e.g. Book History, Media Studies, Digital Humanities, Poetics, Psychoanalysis, Affect Theory, or Neuroaesthetics.
ENGL 802 Professional Development Workshops (1 credit)
The Department holds a series of workshops with the aim of introducing doctoral candidates to pertinent research, teaching, and professional expectations and enhancing career development. In order to graduate, all doctoral candidates must attend these workshops before the end of the sixth term. Master's students are also strongly encouraged to attend the relevant sessions since they are a constitutive component of graduate formation. If a student has attended a given workshop during his/her master's degree, he/she is exempted from that workshop.
Workshops are led by faculty members and organized by the Graduate Program Director on a monthly basis in anticipation both of key dates during the PhD program (e.g. external grant application due dates) and the future professional life of the doctoral candidate (e.g. academic job interviews). The course is graded on a pass/fail basis.
ENGL 890 Thesis Proposal (6 credits)
Students are admitted to candidacy for the PhD upon acceptance by their advisory committee of the written thesis proposal and its successful defence. The oral examination of the written thesis proposal normally takes place in the term following the writing of the field examinations.
ENGL 891 The Major Field Examination I (6 credits)
This course focuses broadly on the candidate’s primary area of specialization, covering major authors, genres, and issues and the pertinent canonical texts therein, in order to consolidate the necessary background knowledge for advanced literary research and teaching at the university level. In the examination, candidates are expected to demonstrate comprehensive knowledge of the designated field as well as an original, critical understanding of the field and its constitutive texts. The Department has established reading lists in nine broad areas of specialization that cover a variety of periods, nations, and subjects. These basic lists may be modified to suit the interests of individual candidates. A substitution of 20 per cent is permitted for all reading lists for the purposes of tailoring the lists to the interests of the student.  Such substitutions are to be determined by agreement between the student and the student's supervisor and are subject to approval by the Graduate Program Committee.
ENGL 892 The Sub-Field Examination II (6 credits)
This course is designed to cultivate a more specific area of inquiry that may include a body of literary texts in combination with readings in a particular set of methodological or theoretical problems to the end of developing a viable doctoral topic and composing a thesis proposal. The Sub-Field Examination list is established by the candidate in consultation with the doctoral supervisor and comprises approximately 60 items that are seen as directly relevant to the field in which the dissertation is oriented. It is divided into three sections: 1) approximately 20 literary texts; 2) approximately 20 theoretical/methodological texts; 3) approximately 20 texts drawn from adjacent and/or ancillary fields. By “text,” it means the number of poems or articles deemed by field specialists as sufficiently representative of an author's work or period. A text cannot appear twice on any of the lists, including that of the Major Field. The lists and texts are not exhaustive, but are meant to provide the student with the necessary initiation to sub-fields that help to clarify the direction and goals of the dissertation.
ENGL 895 Thesis Research (53 credits)
Doctoral students must submit a thesis based on their research and defend it in an oral examination.
Studies Courses (12 credits)
ENGL 801-804 Independent Study in English Literature
ENGL 601-604 Special Topics in English Literature
ENGL 605-609 Studies in Early English Literature and Medieval Literature
ENGL 610-614 Studies in Renaissance Literature
ENGL 615-619 Studies in Restoration and Eighteenth Century Literature
ENGL 620-624 Studies in Nineteenth Century Literature
ENGL 625-629 Studies in Twentieth Century Literature
ENGL 630-634 Studies in Poetry
ENGL 635-639 Studies in Drama
ENGL 640-644 Studies in Fiction
ENGL 645-649 Studies in the History of Ideas
ENGL 650-654 Studies in Shakespeare
ENGL 655-659 Studies in American Literature
ENGL 660-664 Studies in Canadian Literature
ENGL 665-667 Studies in Post-Colonial Literature
ENGL 668-669 Studies in Literary Criticism
ENGL 685-689 Studies in Selected Areas
ENGL 690 Thesis (24 credits)
ENGL 692 Creative Writing Thesis (21 credits)
ENGL 693 Bibliography (6 credits)
The annotated bibliography constitutes a preliminary phase of the research essay. A student must successfully complete the annotated bibliography before producing the research essay. The approximate length of the annotated bibliography is 3,000 words and is supervised by the supervisor of the research essay. The bibliography is assessed on a pass/fail basis.
ENGL 694 Research Essay (18 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGL 693.
A research essay of approximately 10,000 words is supervised by a member of the department and assessed by another faculty member acting as reader. The essay is assessed on a pass/fail basis.
FLIT 600 Méthodologie (3 crédits)
FLIT 601 Théories littéraires (3 crédits)
Séminaires de domaines généraux *
FLIT 605 Littérature et discours (3 crédits)
FLIT 614 Littérature et technologies (3 crédits)
FLIT 617 Textes et images (3 crédits)
FLIT 619 Littérature et société (3 crédits)
FLIT 620 Tutorat en littérature (3 crédits)
FLIT 621 Tutorat en littérature (3 crédits)
FLIT 622 Séminaire avancé en littérature, langue et traduction (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 622.
FLIT 630-639 Séminaire avancé en littératures francophones (3 crédits)
FLIT 640-649 Séminaire avancé en littérature québécoise (3 crédits)
FLIT 650-659 Séminaire avancé en écritures contemporaines (3 crédits)
FLIT 660-669 Séminaire avancé en littérature française (3 crédits)
Autres exigences
FLIT 690 Présentation du mémoire (OPTION A) (6 crédits)
FLIT 691 Présentation du mémoire incluant une réalisation médiatique (OPTION B) (6 crédits)
FLIT 692 Mémoire (OPTION A) (24 crédits)
FLIT 693 Mémoire incluant une réalisation médiatique (OPTION B) (24 crédits)
* Les séminaires de domaines généraux peuvent être suivis dans un autre département de l’Université Concordia ou dans d’autres universités, avec l’accord du directeur ou de la directrice du programme de deuxième cycle en littérature et celui du département concerné. Pour les deux options, un maximum de trois crédits de séminaires non obligatoires peut être remplacé par une lecture dirigée après l’obtention de la permission du directeur ou de la directrice du 2e cycle de littérature.
FLIT 600 Méthodologie (3 crédits)
Dans ce séminaire, l’étudiante ou l’étudiant apprend à formuler des problématiques et à discuter d’hypothèses de recherche. Les étudiants se familiarisent également avec les outils de recherche bibliographique imprimés et informatiques, les règles de présentation de la bibliographie et les principaux types de productions écrites liées à la critique littéraire.
FLIT 601 Théories littéraires (3 crédits)
Ce séminaire permet à l’étudiante ou à l’étudiant d’approfondir sa connaissance de diverses théories littéraires, en tenant compte des approches les plus classiques comme des plus récentes. Le séminaire vise également à explorer le passage de la théorie à la pratique dans l’analyse des textes.
FLIT 605 Littérature et discours (3 crédits)
Ce séminaire s’intéresse à l’interaction dynamique de la littérature avec les diverses formes de discours en circulation dans l’espace social.
FLIT 614 Littérature et technologies (3 crédits)
Dans ce séminaire, on réfléchit à l’impact des technologies sur la littérature. On y étudie les formes littéraires et artistiques nées de l'évolution récente des dispositifs de lecture et d’écriture, ainsi que les modes de diffusion inédits qui en découlent.
FLIT 617 Textes et images (3 crédits)
Ce séminaire est, pour l’étudiante ou l’étudiant, l’occasion d’étudier les rapports entretenus entre texte et l’image entendus dans leur sens large. Dans ce séminaire seront abordés des textes qui incorporent le visuel ou qui en dépendent, comme les textes littéraires illustrés et les bandes-dessinées.
FLIT 619 Littérature et société (3 crédits)
Ce séminaire est, pour l’étudiante ou l’étudiant, l’occasion de réfléchir à la sociologie littéraire, aux rapports entre l’œuvre et son public ou encore aux divers contextes de production, de diffusion, de réception ou de conservation du texte littéraire.
FLIT 620 Tutorat en littérature (3 crédits)
FLIT 621 Tutorat en littérature (3 crédits)
FLIT 622 Littérature, langue et traduction (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 622.
Le séminaire avancé de littérature, langue, et traduction vise à parfaire les connaissances de l’étudiante et de l’étudiant dans un domaine littéraire, traductologique ou linguistique spécifique envisagé sous un angle théorique, historique ou social. Pour animer ce séminaire, il sera fait appel aux professeurs du département en fonction de leur spécialité. Le sujet particulier du séminaire sera annoncé chaque fois que le séminaire sera donné.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FLIT 616 ou FTRA 616 ou FTRA 622 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FLIT 630-639 Séminaire avancé en littératures francophones (3 crédits)
Ce séminaire avancé vise à parfaire les connaissances de l’étudiante et de l’étudiant par une analyse en profondeur d’une thématique et d’un corpus particulier des littératures francophones.
FLIT 640-649 Séminaire avancé en littérature québécoise (3 crédits)
Ce séminaire avancé vise à parfaire les connaissances de l’étudiante et de l’étudiant par une analyse en profondeur d’une thématique et d’un corpus particulier de la littérature québécoise.
FLIT 650-659 Séminaire avancé en écritures contemporaines (3 crédits)
Ce séminaire avancé vise à parfaire les connaissances de l’étudiante et de l’étudiant par une analyse en profondeur d’une thématique et d’un corpus particulier des écritures contemporaines.
FLIT 660-669 Séminaire avancé en littérature française (3 crédits)
Ce séminaire avancé vise à parfaire les connaissances de l'étudiante et de l'étudiant par une analyse en profondeur d'une thématique et d'un corpus particulier de la littérature française.
FLIT 690 Présentation du mémoire (Option A) (6 crédits)
FLIT 691 Présentation du mémoire incluant une réalisation médiatique (Option B) (6 crédits)
FLIT 692 Mémoire (Option A) (24 crédits)
FLIT 693 Mémoire incluant une réalisation médiatique (Option B) (24 crédits)
FTRA 600 Méthodologie générale de la recherche en traduction (3 crédits)
Bloc B (9 cr. au choix)
FTRA 601 Courants contemporains en traductologie (3 crédits)
FTRA 602 Histoire générale de la traduction (3 crédits)
FTRA 603 Contextes socio-politiques de la traduction (3 crédits)
FTRA 610 Lecture critique de traductions (3 crédits)
FTRA 622 Littérature, langue, traduction (3 crédits)
Bloc C (3cr. au choix)
FTRA 636 Informatique et traduction (3 crédits)
FTRA 638 Initiation au sous-titrage (3 crédits)
FTRA 652 Traduction assistée par ordinateur (TAO) et post édition (3 crédits)
FTRA 655 Gestion de projets (3 crédits)
FTRA 658 Pratique de la localisation (3 crédits)
FTRA 668 Web, technologies, traduction : théories et critiques (3 crédits)
Bloc D (30 cr. obligatoires)
FTRA 611 Terminologie et mondialisation (3 crédits)
FTRA 612 Traduction avancée en sciences humaines et sociales (F) (3 crédits)
ou
FTRA 613 Advanced translation in social sciences and the humanities (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 614 Traduction littéraire avancée (F) (3 crédits)
ou
FTRA 615 Advanced literary translation (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 623 Traduction scientifique et technique du français à l’anglais (3 crédits)
ou
FTRA 624 Traduction scientifique et technique de l’anglais au français (3 crédits)
FTRA 625 Traduction commerciale et juridique du français à l’anglais (3 crédits)
ou
FTRA 626 Traduction commerciale et juridique de l’anglais au français (3 crédits)
FTRA 629 Révision et correction en traduction (A) (3 crédits)
ou
FTRA 630 Révision et correction en traduction (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 631 Initiation à la traduction générale (A) (3 crédits)
ou
FTRA 632 Initiation à la traduction générale (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 633 Aspects théoriques et pratiques de la terminologie (3 crédits)
FTRA 634 Traduction littéraire de l’anglais au français (3 crédits)
ou
FTRA 635 Traduction littéraire du français à l’anglais (3 crédits)
FTRA 647 Traduction économique du français à l’anglais (A) (3 crédits)
ou
FTRA 648 Traduction économique de l’anglais au français (F) (3 crédits)
Maîtrise en traductologie (théorique - avec mémoire) Option B
Le Département d’études françaises offre un programme de 2e cycle à visée théorique conduisant au doctorat : la maîtrise en traductologie, avec mémoire option B.
But du programme
Cette option offre une formation poussée favorisant la réflexion et l’acquisition de connaissances de pointe en traductologie aux étudiantes et aux étudiants qui ont réalisé leurs études antérieures en traduction ou dans une discipline proche de la traduction. Ces étudiants peuvent ainsi devenir des langagiers professionnels et poursuivre leurs études au doctorat.
Conditions générales d’admission
Les candidates et les candidats devront détenir un baccalauréat spécialisé (ou « Honours ») en traduction, un diplôme d’études supérieures en traduction, ou encore un baccalauréat ou un diplôme d’études supérieures dans un domaine pertinent à la traduction. Ils devront posséder les compétences linguistiques nécessaires à la traduction (maîtrise de la langue d’arrivée, compréhension fine de la langue de départ), avoir un excellent dossier universitaire (moyenne générale de 3 sur 4,3) et démontrer des aptitudes pour la traduction. La direction du programme pourra exiger qu’une candidate ou qu’un candidat suive au besoin une propédeutique.
La demande d’admission doit s’accompagner des pièces suivantes :
trois lettres de recommandation;
une lettre de présentation où la candidate ou le candidat décrit sa formation et son expérience dans les domaines langagiers ainsi que ses attentes à l’égard du programme;
des relevés de notes officiels de l’université ou des universités fréquentées.
La sélection des candidatures est effectuée sur la base des éléments suivants :
le dossier universitaire de la candidate ou du candidat;
les lettres de recommandation;
un examen d’admission qui vérifie les compétences linguistiques et culturelles de la candidate ou du candidat.
Rendement académique
Voir la section Academic Standing de l'Annuaire pour la Réglementation universitaire.
Toute note inférieure à C représente un échec. Le comité des études supérieures du Département revoit le dossier de chaque étudiante et de chaque étudiant tous les ans et peut exiger que celles et ceux dont les résultats ne satisfont pas aux normes du Département (moyenne générale de 3,0 sur 4,3) se retirent du programme.
Durée des études
La durée des études pour les étudiantes et étudiants à temps plein est d'un minimum de trois sessions et d'un maximum de douze sessions à partir de la date d'inscription. Pour les étudiantes et étudiants à temps partiel, le maximum est de quinze sessions.
Exigences du programme
Toute étudiante ou tout étudiant doit obtenir un minimum de 45 crédits.
Structure du programme
Toute étudiante ou tout étudiant est tenu à 15 crédits de séminaires, à 6 crédits de présentation du projet de mémoire et à 24 crédits de mémoire.
Séminaires obligatoires : 9 crédits
Séminaires à option : 6 crédits
Projet de mémoire : 6 crédits
Mémoire : 24 crédits
Séminaires
Les cours obligatoires sont des séminaires de fondement théorique et d’histoire de la traduction. Les cours au choix sont des séminaires spécialisés dans le domaine sociocritique et des séminaires de traduction en littérature et en sciences humaines.
Séminaires obligatoires (9 cr.)
FTRA 600 Méthodologie générale de la recherche en traduction (3 crédits)
FTRA 601 Courants contemporains en traductologie (3 crédits)
FTRA 602 Histoire générale de la traduction (3 crédits)
Séminaires au choix (6 cr.)
FTRA 603 Contextes socio-politiques de la traduction (3 crédits)
FTRA 610 Lecture critique de traductions (3 crédits)
FTRA 612 Traduction avancée en sciences humaines et sociales (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 613 Advanced translation in social sciences and the humanities (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 614 Traduction littéraire avancée (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 615 Advanced literary translation (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 622 Littérature, langue, traduction (3 crédits)
FTRA 680 Tutorat en littérature (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 681 Tutorial in literature (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 682 Tutorat en traduction (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 683 Tutorial in translation (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 684 Tutorat en linguistique (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 685 Tutorial in linguistics (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 698 Étude d’un sujet particulier / Special Topics (3 crédits)
Autres exigences (30 cr.)
FTRA 686 Projet de mémoire (6 crédits)
FTRA 692 Mémoire (24 crédits)
Nota : Les étudiantes et les étudiants admis en maîtrise peuvent bénéficier d’une aide financière pendant la durée de leurs études, sous la forme d’assistanats de recherche ou d’enseignement. Ces aides varient selon les années et les étudiantes et étudiants intéressés doivent se faire connaître auprès de la direction du programme une fois admis.
Cours et séminaires
FTRA 600 Méthodologie générale de la recherche en traduction (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 500.
Ce séminaire examine les principales méthodes et approches appliquées à l’étude de la traduction. Il trace l’émergence de la discipline autonome de la traductologie ainsi que ses liens actuels avec d’autres sciences humaines et sociales. À l’issue du séminaire, l’étudiante ou l’étudiant a une vue d’ensemble de la théorisation en traduction, ce qui lui permet de se spécialiser en connaissance de cause dans un domaine spécifique, en élaborant une problématique particulière cohérente avec les visées du programme et en empruntant les outils de recherche pertinents.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 500 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 601 Courants contemporains en traductologie (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 539.
Ce séminaire aborde les tendances qui marquent l’actualité de la recherche en traductologie. Sont explorées les nouvelles pratiques de la traduction et l’évolution des cadres conceptuels qui permettent de penser le transfert linguistique et culturel.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 539 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 602 Histoire générale de la traduction (3 crédits)
Ce séminaire est une introduction à l’histoire générale de la traduction, notamment (mais non exclusivement) en Occident, ainsi qu’à l’évolution des approches historiographiques. Une vue en coupe est présentée à travers des thématiques permettant de dégager le rôle historique joué par les traducteurs comme acteurs sociaux proches des pouvoirs en place ou critiques de ces pouvoirs. L’accent est mis sur la créativité des traducteurs à certaines époques clés de contacts entre des cultures. Le séminaire peut aborder certains domaines précis de la traduction et des travaux menés à des périodes historiques et dans des aires géographiques données.
FTRA 603 Contextes socio-politiques de la traduction (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 553.
Ce séminaire examine les situations sociales et politiques qui influent sur le travail pratique des traducteurs et la réception des traductions. Sont étudiés, par exemple,le cas des États bilingues ou multilingues, l'évolution des politiques linguistiques et leurs répercussions sur la traduction, les rapports entre les langues majoritaires et minoritaires, les effets de la migration sur les sociétés de plus en plus hybrides et les marchés nouveaux de la traduction.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 553 ou FTRA 550 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 610 Lecture critique de traductions (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 540.
Ce séminaire propose une étude critique des traductions de l’anglais au français et du français à l’anglais effectuées à travers l’histoire, en tenant compte de la diversité des visées esthétiques, des différentes stratégies de traduction, ainsi que des contraintes socio-politiques ou institutionnelles. L’accent est mis sur l’étude des « grandes traductions » dans les cultures d’expression anglaise et française.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 540 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 611 Terminologie et mondialisation (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 534.
Préalable : FTRA 533. Le cours porte sur certains points fins en terminologie et en terminographie modernes : synonymie, marques sociolinguistiques, néonymie, normalisation et internationalisation. Il traite spécifiquement du rôle de la terminologie dans la gestion de l’information unilingue et multi‑lingue dans les entreprises et dans les organismes nationaux et internationaux. L’aspect pratique prend, entre autres, la forme de rédaction de rapports de recherche et l’utilisation d’outils terminotiques. (F/A)
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 534 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 612 Traduction avancée en sciences humaines et sociales (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 613 Advanced translation in social sciences and the humanities (A) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 542 ou 543.
Ce séminaire pratique et théorique aborde plusieurs domaines des sciences humaines et sociales, notamment la sociologie, la psychanalyse, la théorie féministe. L’étudiante ou l’étudiant produit un commentaire analytique sur ses choix de traduction en s’efforçant de théoriser sa pratique de traducteur-traductrice. Le séminaire FTRA 612 a l’anglais comme langue de départ et le français comme langue d’arrivée (F); le séminaire FTRA 613 a le français comme langue de départ et l’anglais comme langue d’arrivée. (A)
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 542 ou FTRA 543 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 614 Traduction littéraire avancée (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 615 Advanced literary translation (A) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 544 ou 545.
Ce séminaire pratique et théorique analyse, à partir de théories littéraires contemporaines, un échantillon de textes à traduire. L’étudiante ou l’étudiant produit un commentaire analytique sur ses choix de traduction en s’efforçant de théoriser sa pratique de traducteur-traductrice. Le séminaire FTRA 614 a l’anglais comme langue de départ et le français comme langue d’arrivée (F), le séminaire FTRA 615 a le français comme langue de départ et l’anglais comme langue d’arrivée. (A)
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 544 ou FTRA 545 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 622 Littérature, langue, traduction (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FLIT 622.
Le séminaire avancé de littérature, langue et traduction vise à parfaire les connaissances de l’étudiante et de l’étudiant dans un domaine littéraire, traductologique ou linguistique spécifique envisagé sous un angle théorique, historique ou social. Pour animer ce séminaire, il sera fait appel aux professeurs du département en fonction de leur spécialité. Le sujet particulier du séminaire sera annoncé chaque fois que le séminaire sera donné.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 616, FLIT 616 ou FLIT 622 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 623 Traduction scientifique et technique du français à l’anglais (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 513.
Initiation aux différents problèmes de la traduction dans les langues de spécialité scientifiques et techniques (français-anglais). Le cours est divisé en deux ou trois parties, chaque partie correspondant à un domaine spécialisé en traduction (A).
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 513 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 624 Traduction scientifique et technique de l’anglais au français (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 514.
Initiation aux différents problèmes de la traduction dans les langues de spécialité scientifiques et techniques (anglais-français). Le cours est divisé en deux ou trois parties, chaque partie correspondant à un domaine spécialisé en traduction (F).
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 514 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 625 Traduction commerciale et juridique du français à l’anglais (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 515.
Initiation aux différents problèmes de la traduction dans les langues de spécialité de l’administration, du commerce et du droit (français-anglais). Le cours est divisé en parties, chaque partie correspondant à un domaine spécialisé en traduction (A).
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 515 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 626 Traduction commerciale et juridique de l’anglais au français (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 516.
Initiation aux différents problèmes de la traduction dans les langues de spécialité de l’administration, du commerce et du droit (anglais-français). Le cours est divisé en parties, chaque partie correspondant à un domaine spécialisé (F).
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 516 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 629 Révision et correction en traduction (A) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 529.
Ce cours aborde les différentes méthodes de révision et de correction de textes rédigés ou traduits en anglais; il sensibilise les étudiantes et étudiants aux aspects humains et techniques du métier de réviseure et de réviseur; on touche aussi aux problèmes de l’évaluation de la qualité des traductions (A).
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 529 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 630 Révision et correction en traduction (F) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 530.
Ce cours aborde les différentes méthodes de révision et de correction de textes rédigés ou traduits en français; il sensibilise les étudiantes et étudiants aux aspects humains et techniques du métier de réviseure et de réviseur; on touche aussi aux problèmes de l’évaluation de la qualité des traductions (F).
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 530 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 631 Initiation à la traduction générale (A) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 531.
Ce cours vise à initier les étudiantes et étudiants aux outils notionnels et linguistiques nécessaires pour traduire efficacement des textes d’ordre général. Il leur présente aussi les étapes du processus de la traduction et les familiarise avec les outils de travail de la traduction.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 531 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 632 Initiation à la traduction générale (F) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 532.
Ce cours vise à initier les étudiantes et étudiants aux outils notionnels et linguistiques nécessaires pour traduire efficacement des textes d’ordre général. Il leur présente aussi les étapes du processus de la traduction et les familiarise avec les outils de travail de la traduction.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 532 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 633 Aspects théoriques et pratiques de la terminologie (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 533.
Principes généraux de la terminologie; distinction entre langue générale et langues de spécialité; rapport entre documentation et terminologie; analyse terminologique; terminologie de traduction; supports terminographiques traditionnels et/ou informatisés; terminologie et aménagement linguistique.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 533 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 634 Traduction littéraire de l’anglais au français (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 504.
Sensibilisation aux problèmes spécifiques à la traduction littéraire. Travaux pratiques : traduction de textes de genres variés (F).
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 504 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 635 Traduction littéraire du français à l’anglais (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 501.
Sensibilisation aux problèmes spécifiques à la traduction littéraire. Travaux pratiques : traduction de textes de genres variés (A).
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 501 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 636 Informatique et traduction (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 536.
Ce cours porte sur la langue de l’informatique, la théorie et les concepts fondamentaux qui s’y rapportent. Il comporte des exercices de traduction et une initiation aux outils informatisés pour les traducteurs : Internet, bases de données, systèmes de traduction assistée,utilitaires. (F/A)
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 536 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 638 Initiation au sous-titrage (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 538.
Ce cours a pour but d’initier les étudiantes et étudiants à la traduction audiovisuelle, en particulier au sous-titrage. Il comporte un volet théorique, avec lectures et analyses, ainsi qu’un volet pratique où sont traités les principes et les conventions du sous-titrage, les aspects techniques et les genres cinématographiques. Sont aussi abordées la traduction de la voix hors-champ et les techniques d’accessibilité tels le sous-titrage pour malentendants et l’audiodescription.
FTRA 647 Traduction économique du français à l’anglais (A) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 547.
Sensibilisation aux problèmes que pose dans le domaine de l’économie la traduction du français à l’anglais. (A)
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 547 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 648 Traduction économique de l’anglais au français (F) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 548.
Sensibilisation aux problèmes que pose dans le domaine de l’économie la traduction de l’anglais au français. (F)
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 548 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 652 Traduction assistée par ordinateur (TAO) et post édition (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 552.
Préalable : FTRA 536 pour le diplôme en traduction.
Ce cours permet d’analyser les aspects morphologiques, lexicaux, syntaxiques et sémantiques des systèmes de traduction automatisée. L’étudiante et l’étudiant apprennent à appliquer les concepts analysés à un système commercialisé. Ils font des exercices simples de programmation portant sur des problèmes linguistiques; ils utilisent des outils de gestion et de traduction pour le matériel à localiser à l’aide de logiciels de localisation, de logiciels de terminologie et de mémoires de traduction. Ils évaluent et apprennent à réviser les sorties d'un système de traduction automatique, tout en mettant l'accent sur le contrôle de la qualité.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 552 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 655 Gestion de projets (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 555.
Ce cours traite de la gestion des projets de traduction/localisation multilingues, depuis la création de l’offre de services, jusqu’au contrôle de la qualité et de la livraison, en passant par la résolution de problèmes et la gestion en situation de crise. Il comprend une partie théorique et des mises en situation. Les étudiantes et étudiants se familiarisent avec l’évaluation des ressources (humaines et matérielles) nécessaires pour exécuter le travail, l’élaboration d’échéanciers et le suivi du budget. Ils apprennent à gérer les ressources affectées aux projets afin de pouvoir respecter le mandat qui leur est confié.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 555 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 658 Pratique de la localisation (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 558.
L’étudiante et l’étudiant apprennent dans ce cours les stratégies de localisation et les processus de localisation; la localisation de logiciels et de localisation de sites Web; les acteurs dans les projets de localisation; la situation et le travail du traducteur dans les projets de localisation; les types de fichiers à localiser : ressources, code source, fichiers d’aide, guides imprimés, matériel marketing; les types de logiciels localisés : logiciels système, logiciels de gestion, logiciels client, logiciels multimédia, logiciels Web.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 558 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 668 Web, technologies, traduction : théories et critiques (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 568.
Ce séminaire examine de façon critique les pratiques contemporaines issues de la mondialisation et du monde numérique affectant les technologies, le Web multilingue et la traduction. Entre autres aspects, sont examinés les enjeux culturels, sociaux, techniques et idéologiques. Le séminaire met l'accent sur la traduction et la communication mondiale.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 568 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 680 Tutorat en littérature (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 681 Tutorial in literature (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 682 Tutorat en traduction (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 683 Tutorial in translation (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 684 Tutorat en linguistique (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 685 Tutorial in linguistics (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 698 Étude d’un sujet particulier / Special Topics (3 crédits)
Ce cours pourra porter sur tout sujet en littérature, traduction ou linguistique qui ne figure pas déjà au programme. Le but du cours est de favoriser une approche pluridisciplinaire et de permettre l’innovation pédagogique.
Autres exigences
FTRA 686 Projet de mémoire (6 crédits)
FTRA 692 Mémoire (24 crédits)
L’étudiante ou l’étudiant pourra choisir d’étudier un sujet particulier en littérature, traduction ou linguistique, sous la forme d’un tutorat. Les tutorats devront être approuvés par le comité d’études supérieures et dépendront des aptitudes et intérêts de l’étudiante et de l’étudiant ainsi que de la disponibilité et des compétences du professeur concerné.
Nota : Les étudiantes et étudiants admis avant 2002-2003 et qui ont préféré rester dans l’ancien programme peuvent suivre FTRA 690 (21 crédits) à condition d’avoir satisfait aux exigences de l’ancien programme.
FTRA 501 Traduction littéraire du français à l’anglais (3 crédits)
ou
FTRA 504 Traduction littéraire de l’anglais au français (3 crédits)
FTRA 532 Initiation à la traduction générale (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 533 Aspects théoriques et pratiques de la terminologie (3 crédits)
FTRA 536 Informatique et traduction (3 crédits)
FTRA 500 Méthodologie générale de la recherche en traduction (3 crédits)
ou
FTRA 539 Courants contemporains en traductologie (3 crédits)
ou
FTRA 540 Lecture critique de traductions (3 crédits)
ou
FTRA 549 Sociologie de la traduction littéraire (3 crédits)
FTRA 529 Révision et correction en traduction (A) (3 crédits)
ou
FTRA 530 Révision et correction en traduction (F) (3 crédits)
Cours en option (15 crédits)
15 crédits choisis parmi les cours suivants :
FRAA 523 Rédaction II (3 crédits)
FTRA 513 Traduction scientifique et technique du français à l’anglais (3 crédits)
FTRA 514 Traduction scientifique et technique de l’anglais au français (3 crédits)
FTRA 515 Traduction commerciale et juridique du français à l’anglais (3 crédits)
FTRA 516 Traduction commerciale et juridique de l’anglais au français(3 crédits)
FTRA 517 Stage de formation du français à l’anglais I (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 519 Stage de formation du français à l’anglais II (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 520 Stage de formation (F) (6 crédits)
FTRA 521 Stage de formation (A) (6 crédits)
FTRA 522 Stage de formation de l’anglais au français I (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 526 Stage de formation de l’anglais au français II (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 527 Travaux dirigés (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 528 Travaux dirigés (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 534 Terminologie et mondialisation (3 crédits)
FTRA 538 Initiation au sous-titrage (3 crédits)
FTRA 542 Traduction avancée en sciences humaines et sociales (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 543 Advanced Translation in Social Sciences and the Humanities (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 544 Traduction littéraire avancée (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 545 Advanced Literary Translation (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 547 Traduction économique du français à l’anglais(A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 548 Traduction économique de l’anglais au français (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 552 Traduction assistée par ordinateur (TAO) et post édition (3 crédits)
FTRA 553 Contextes socio-politiques de la traduction (3 crédits)
FTRA 555 Gestion de projets (3 crédits)
FTRA 558 Pratique de la localisation (3 crédits)
FRAA 598 Étude avancée d’un sujet particulier (3 crédits)
FTRA 598 Étude avancée d’un sujet particulier (3 crédits)
Liste des cours
FRAA 523 Rédaction II (3 crédits)
Ce cours vise l’approfondissement des compétences rédactionnelles par l’apprentissage de techniques de recherche documentaire et de synthese textuelle, et par l’écriture de textes combinant ces techniques comme le compte rendu critique, le dossier ou le texte de vulgarisation.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FRAN 503 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 500 Méthodologie générale de la recherche en traduction (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 600.
Ce séminaire examine les principales méthodes et approches appliquées à l’étude de la traduction. Il trace l’émergence de la discipline autonome de la traductologie ainsi que ses liens actuels avec d’autres sciences humaines et sociales. À l’issue du séminaire, l’étudiante ou l’étudiant a une vue d’ensemble de la théorisation en traduction, ce qui lui permet de se spécialiser en connaissance de cause dans un domaine spécifique, en élaborant une problématique particulière cohérente avec les visées du programme et en empruntant les outils de recherche pertinents.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 600 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 501 Traduction littéraire du français à l’anglais (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 635.
Sensibilisation aux problèmes spécifiques à la traduction littéraire. Travaux pratiques : traduction de textes de genres variés (A).
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 635 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 504 Traduction littéraire de l’anglais au français (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 634.
Sensibilisation aux problèmes spécifiques à la traduction littéraire. Travaux pratiques : traduction de textes de genres variés (F).
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 634 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 513 Traduction scientifique et technique du français à l’anglais (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 623.
Initiation aux différents problèmes de la traduction dans les langues de spécialité scientifiques et techniques (français-anglais). Le cours est divisé en deux ou trois parties, chaque partie correspondant à un domaine spécialisé en traduction (A).
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 623 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 514 Traduction scientifique et technique de l’anglais au français (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 624.
Initiation aux différents problèmes de la traduction dans les langues de spécialité scientifiques et techniques (anglais-français). Le cours est divisé en deux ou trois parties, chaque partie correspondant à un domaine spécialisé en traduction (F).
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 624 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 515 Traduction commerciale et juridique du français à l’anglais (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 625.
Initiation aux différents problèmes de la traduction dans les langues de spécialité de l’administration, du commerce et du droit (français-anglais). Le cours est divisé en parties, chaque partie correspondant à un domaine spécialisé en traduction (A).
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 625 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 516 Traduction commerciale et juridique de l’anglais au français (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 626.
Initiation aux différents problèmes de la traduction dans les langues de spécialité de l’administration, du commerce et du droit (anglais-français). Le cours est divisé en parties, chaque partie correspondant à un domaine spécialisé (F).
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 626 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 517 Stage de formation du français à l’anglais I (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 519 Stage de formation du français à l’anglais II (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 520 Stage de formation (F) (6 crédits)
FTRA 521 Stage de formation (A) (6 crédits)
FTRA 522 Stage de formation de l’anglais au français I (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 526 Stage de formation de l’anglais au français II (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 527 Travaux dirigés (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 528 Travaux dirigés (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 529 Révision et correction en traduction (A) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 629.
Ce cours aborde les différentes méthodes de révision et de correction de textes rédigés ou traduits en anglais; il sensibilise les étudiantes et étudiants aux aspects humains et techniques du métier de réviseure et de réviseur; on touche aussi aux problèmes de l’évaluation de la qualité des traductions (A).
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 629 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 530 Révision et correction en traduction (F) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 630.
Ce cours aborde les différentes méthodes de révision et de correction de textes rédigés ou traduits en français; il sensibilise les étudiantes et étudiants aux aspects humains et techniques du métier de réviseure et de réviseur; on touche aussi aux problèmes de l’évaluation de la qualité des traductions (F).
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 630 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 531 Initiation à la traduction générale (A) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 631.
Ce cours vise à initier les étudiantes et étudiants aux outils notionnels et linguistiques nécessaires pour traduire efficacement des textes d’ordre général. Il leur présente aussi les étapes du processus de la traduction et les familiarise avec les outils de travail de la traduction.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 631 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 532 Initiation à la traduction générale (F) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 632.
Ce cours vise à initier les étudiantes et étudiants aux outils notionnels et linguistiques nécessaires pour traduire efficacement des textes d’ordre général. Il leur présente aussi les étapes du processus de la traduction et les familiarise avec les outils de travail de la traduction.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 632 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 533 Aspects théoriques et pratiques de la terminologie (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 633.
Principes généraux de la terminologie; distinction entre langue générale et langues de spécialité; rapport entre documentation et terminologie; analyse terminologique; terminologie de traduction; supports terminographiques traditionnels et/ou informatisés; terminologie et aménagement linguistique.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 633 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 534 Terminologie et mondialisation (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 611.
Préalable : FTRA 533 ou l’équivalent.
Ce cours porte sur certains points fins en terminologie et en terminographie modernes : synonymie, marques sociolinguistiques, néonymie, normalisation et internationalisation. Il traite spécifiquement du rôle de la terminologie dans la gestion de l’information unilingue et multilingue dans les entreprises et dans les organismes nationaux et internationaux. L’aspect pratique prend, entre autres, la forme de rédaction de rapports de recherche et l’utilisation d’outils terminotiques.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 611 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 536 Informatique et traduction (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 636.
Ce cours porte sur la langue de l’informatique, la théorie et les concepts fondamentaux qui s’y rapportent. Il comporte des exercices de traduction et une initiation aux outils informatisés pour les traducteurs : Internet, bases de données, systèmes de traduction assistée, utilitaires. (F/A)
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 636 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 538 Initiation au sous-titrage (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 638.
Ce cours a pour but d’initier les étudiantes et étudiants à la traduction audiovisuelle, en particulier au sous-titrage. Il comporte un volet théorique, avec lectures et analyses, ainsi qu’un volet pratique où sont traités les principes et les conventions du sous-titrage, les aspects techniques et les genres cinématographiques. Sont aussi abordées la traduction de la voix hors-champ et les techniques d’accessibilité tels le sous-titrage pour malentendants et l’audiodescription.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 638 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 539 Courants contemporains en traductologie (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 601.
Ce séminaire aborde les tendances qui marquent l’actualité de la recherche en traductologie. Sont explorées les nouvelles pratiques de la traduction et l’évolution des cadres conceptuels qui permettent de penser le transfert linguistique et culturel.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 601 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 540 Lecture critique de traductions (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 610.
Ce séminaire propose une étude critique des traductions de l’anglais au français et du français à l’anglais effectuées à travers l’histoire, en tenant compte de la diversité des visées esthétiques, des différentes stratégies de traduction, ainsi que des contraintes socio-politiques ou institutionnelles. L’accent est mis sur l’étude des « grandes traductions » dans les cultures d’expression anglaise et française.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 610 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 542 Traduction avancée en sciences humaines et sociales (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 543 Advanced Translation in Social Sciences and the Humanities (A) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 612 ou FTRA 613.
Ce séminaire pratique et théorique aborde plusieurs domaines des sciences humaines et sociales, notamment la sociologie, la psychanalyse, la théorie féministe. L’étudiante ou l’étudiant produit un commentaire analytique sur ses choix de traduction en s’efforçant de théoriser sa pratique de traducteur-traductrice. Le séminaire FTRA 542 a l’anglais comme langue de départ et le français comme langue d’arrivée (F); le séminaire FTRA 543 a le français comme langue de départ et l’anglais comme langue d’arrivée (A).
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 612 ou FTRA 613 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 544 Traduction littéraire avancée (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 545 Advanced Literary Translation (A) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 614 ou FTRA 615.
Ce séminaire pratique et théorique analyse, à partir de théories littéraires, contemporaines, un échantillon de textes à traduire. L’étudiante ou l’étudiant produit un commentaire analytique sur ses choix de traduction en s’efforçant de théoriser sa pratique de traducteur-traductrice. Le séminaire FTRA 544 a l’anglais comme langue de départ et le français comme langue d’arrivée (F); le séminaire FTRA 545 a le français comme langue de départ et l’anglais comme langue d’arrivée. (A)
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 614 ou FTRA 615 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 547 Traduction économique du français à l’anglais (A) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 647.
Sensibilisation aux problèmes que pose dans le domaine de l’économie la traduction du français à l’anglais. (A)
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 647 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 548 Traduction économique de l’anglais au français (F) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 648.
Sensibilisation aux problèmes que pose dans le domaine de l’économie la traduction de l’anglais au français. (F)
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 648 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 549 Sociologie de la traduction littéraire (3 crédits)
Ce séminaire applique la méthode sociologique à la traduction des genres et des discours de la littérature. Peuvent être étudiés des corpus divers (roman, poésie, théâtre, par exemple) traduits de l’anglais en français et du français en anglais. Seront examinées, par exemple, les théories de Pierre Bourdieu, de Niklas Luhmann ou de Bruno Latour. Le séminaire est l’occasion d’une remise en question des notions de source et de cible en traduction.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 541, FTRA 611 ou FTRA 619 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 552 Traduction assistée par ordinateur (TAO) et post édition (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 652.
Préalable : FTRA 536 pour le diplôme en traduction.
Ce cours permet d’analyser les aspects morphologiques, lexicaux, syntaxiques et sémantiques des systèmes de traduction automatisée. L’étudiante et l’étudiant apprennent à appliquer les concepts analysés à un système commercialisé. Ils font des exercices simples de programmation portant sur des problèmes linguistiques; ils utilisent des outils de gestion et de traduction pour le matériel à localiser à l’aide de logiciels de localisation, de logiciels de terminologie et de mémoires de traduction. Ils évaluent et apprennent à réviser les sorties d'un système de traduction automatique, tout en mettant l'accent sur le contrôle de la qualité.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 652 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 553 Contextes socio-politiques de la traduction (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 603.
Ce séminaire examine les situations sociales et politiques qui influent sur le travail pratique des traducteurs et la réception des traductions. Sont étudiés, par exemple, le cas des États bilingues ou multilingues, l'évolution des politiques linguistiques et leurs répercussions sur la traduction, les rapports entre les langues majoritaires et minoritaires, les effets de la migration sur les sociétés de plus en plus hybrides et les marchés nouveaux de la traduction.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 550 ou FTRA 603 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 555 Gestion de projets (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 655.
Ce cours traite de la gestion des projets de traduction/localisation multilingues, depuis la création de l’offre de services, jusqu’au contrôle de la qualité et de la livraison, en passant par la résolution de problèmes et la gestion en situation de crise. Il comprend une partie théorique et des mises en situation. Les étudiantes et étudiants se familiarisent avec l’évaluation des ressources (humaines et matérielles) nécessaires pour exécuter le travail, l’élaboration d’échéanciers et le suivi du budget. Ils apprennent à gérer les ressources affectées aux projets afin de pouvoir respecter le mandat qui leur est confié.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 655 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 558 Pratique de la localisation (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 658.
L’étudiante et l’étudiant apprennent dans ce cours les stratégies de localisation et les processus de localisation; la localisation de logiciels et la localisation de sites Web; les acteurs dans les projets de localisation; la situation et le travail du traducteur dans les projets de localisation; les types de fichiers à localiser : ressources, code source, fichiers d’aide, guides imprimés, matériel marketing; les types de logiciels localisés : logiciels système, logiciels de gestion, logiciels clients, logiciels multimédia, logiciels Web.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 658 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 559 Stage en gestion de projet (6 crédits)
FTRA 560 Stage en gestion de projet I (3 crédits)
FTRA 561 Stage en gestion de projet II (3 crédits)
FRAA 598 Étude avancée d’un sujet particulier (3 crédits)
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi un sujet particulier en FRAN 598 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour le même sujet en FRAA 598.
FTRA 598 Étude avancée d’un sujet particulier (3 crédits)
FRAA 500 Didactique du français langue étrangère et seconde (3 crédits)
Ce séminaire vise à présenter les principaux courants en didactique du français langue étrangère et seconde et leurs fondements théoriques. En se basant sur les théories de l’apprentissage, les étudiants analysent en profondeur chacun des principaux courants didactiques en apprenant à discerner ce qui les différencie, les rapproche ou les oppose. Ce séminaire leur offre les outils nécessaires pour faire un choix didactique éclairé en fonction de l'apprentissage visé. Ils y ont l’occasion d’animer un atelier de conversation auprès d’apprenants allophones pour pouvoir faire des liens entre leurs nouveaux acquis et la réalité de l’enseignement-apprentissage, et ce, sous la supervision d’un professeur.
FRAA 501 Théories linguistiques pour l'apprentissage et l’enseignement des langues (3 crédits)
Ce séminaire amène les étudiants à faire le lien entre les théories linguistiques et les applications à l’enseignement et à l’apprentissage du français langue seconde. Il permet aux étudiants de jeter un regard critique sur les principaux courants en linguistique appliquée à l’enseignement des langues et de se sensibiliser à des questions fondamentales qui se posent du point de vue de l’enseignant et de l’apprenant respectivement.
FRAA 502 Technologies de l'information et de la communication (TIC) et enseignement du FLS (3 crédits)
Ce séminaire vise à transmettre aux étudiants l'ensemble des compétences nécessaires à la réalisation de ressources interactives tirant pleinement profit des potentialités offertes par les TIC (apprentissage collaboratif, multimédia, parcours d'apprentissage personnalisés, etc.). Au moyen de la conception de matériel pédagogique en ligne (exerciciels, plateformes de formation ouverte et à distance), les étudiants voient comment optimiser l'apport des TIC à l'acquisition de la langue cible ou à l'évaluation des acquis; intégrer les fondements théoriques et pratiques acquis dans les autres séminaires et répondre pleinement aux besoins des apprenants (que ces besoins soient formatifs ou sommatifs) tout en évitant les écueils didactiques ou techniques que la réalisation de ce type de ressources peut comporter.
FRAA 510 Stage d'observation (3 crédits)
Ce cours permet aux étudiants de réaliser leur stage d'observation en enseignement du français langue seconde dans le cadre d'un cours universitaire. Au cours de ce stage, les étudiants analysent les moyens pédagogiques utilisés au niveau universitaire. Les stagiaires observent les activités d'enseignement, l'organisation et la prise en charge de la classe et ils font un retour critique sur leur expérience pratique à partir des observations faites dans le milieu de stage.
FRAA 522 Questions actuelles en linguistique française (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FRAA 422
Ce cours propose l’étude d’un sujet particulier du domaine de la linguistique. Plus précisément, ce cours aborde des questions qui peuvent être rattachées au domaine de l’énonciation, de la sociolinguistique, des politiques linguistiques, du traitement automatique du langage ou d’autres domaines de recherche en linguistique. Des présentations théoriques, des ateliers d’observation ou des exercices d’application permettent aux étudiants de mieux cerner la problématique abordée.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FRAA 422 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 536 Informatique et traduction (3 crédits)
FTRA 552 Traduction assistée par ordinateur (TAO) et post édition (3 crédits)
FTRA 558 Pratique de la localisation (3 crédits)
FTRA 568 Web, technologies, traduction : théories et critiques
Cours en option (3 crédits)
FRAA 532 Écriture pour le web (3 crédits)
FTRA 538 Initiation au sous-titrage (offert aux deux ans) (3 crédits)
FTRA 555 Gestion de projets (3 crédits)
FTRA 556 Programmation en localisation (offert aux deux ans) (3 crédits)
FTRA 598 Étude avancée d’un sujet particulier / Special Topics (3 crédits)
Liste des cours
FRAA 532 Écriture pour le Web (3 crédits)
Préalable : Autorisation de la direction du certificat.
Ce cours vise à familiariser l’étudiante ou l’étudiant aux techniques d’écriture pour le Web et aux technologies associées à ce média. Il permettra de mieux comprendre ce que l’hypertexte et l’écrit sur support numérique impliquent du point de vue du traitement de l’information et des spécificités linguistiques et ergonomiques. Il vise à initier l’étudiante et l’étudiant à la création et à la traduction de pages et de sites Web.
FTRA 531 Initiation à la traduction générale (A) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 631.
Ce cours vise à initier les étudiantes et étudiants aux outils notionnels et linguistiques nécessaires pour traduire efficacement des textes d’ordre général. Il leur présente aussi les étapes du processus de la traduction et les familiarise avec les outils de travail de la traduction.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 631 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 532 Initiation à la traduction générale (F) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 632.
Ce cours vise à initier les étudiantes et étudiants aux outils notionnels et linguistiques nécessaires pour traduire efficacement des textes d’ordre général. Il leur présente aussi les étapes du processus de la traduction et les familiarise avec les outils de travail de la traduction.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 632 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 536 Informatique et traduction (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 636.
Ce cours porte sur la langue de l’informatique, la théorie et les concepts fondamentaux qui s’y rapportent. Il comporte des exercices de traduction et une initiation aux outils informatisés pour les traducteurs : Internet, bases de données, systèmes de traduction assistée, utilitaires. (F/A)
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 636 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 538 Initiation au sous-titrage (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 638.
Ce cours a pour but d’initier les étudiantes et étudiants à la traduction audiovisuelle, en
particulier au sous-titrage. Il comporte un volet théorique, avec lectures et analyses, ainsi
qu’un volet pratique où sont traités les principes et les conventions du sous-titrage, les
aspects techniques et les genres cinématographiques. Sont aussi abordées la traduction
de la voix hors-champ et les techniques d’accessibilité tels le sous-titrage pour
malentendants et l’audiodescription.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 638 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 552 Traduction assistée par ordinateur (TAO) et post édition (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 652.
Préalable : FTRA 536 pour le diplôme en traduction.
Ce cours permet d’analyser les aspects morphologiques, lexicaux, syntaxiques et sémantiques des systèmes de traduction automatisée. L’étudiante et l’étudiant apprennent à appliquer les concepts analysés à un système commercialisé. Ils font des exercices simples de programmation portant sur des problèmes linguistiques; ils utilisent des outils de gestion et de traduction pour le matériel à localiser à l’aide de logiciels de localisation, de logiciels de terminologie et de mémoires de traduction. Ils évaluent et apprennent à réviser les sorties d'un système de traduction automatique, tout en mettant l'accent sur le contrôle de la qualité.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 652 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 555 Gestion de projets (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 655.
Ce cours traite de la gestion des projets de traduction/localisation multilingues, depuis la création de l’offre de services, jusqu’au contrôle de la qualité et de la livraison, en passant par la résolution de problèmes et la gestion en situation de crise. Il comprend une partie théorique et des mises en situation. Les étudiantes et étudiants se familiarisent avec l’évaluation des ressources (humaines et matérielles) nécessaires pour exécuter le travail, l’élaboration d’échéanciers et le suivi du budget. Ils apprennent à gérer les ressources affectées aux projets afin de pouvoir respecter le mandat qui leur est confié.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 655 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 556 Programmation en localisation (3 crédits)
Préalable : FTRA 552 ou FTRA 558.
L’étudiante et l’étudiant se familiarisent dans ce cours avec l’environnement informatique : ils se familiarisent avec l’intégration et le partage des ressources d’un (et avec un) logiciel (d’une page Internet) et avec les restrictions liées au système d’exploitation; ils ont un aperçu du fonctionnement d’un logiciel (rédaction, compilation, exécution), d’un programme informatique : variables, données, contrôle; d’un langage de programmation : structure, manipulation des chaînes d’entrée et de sortie, du code « source » d’un programme informatique (ou site Internet) à localiser, des chaînes (des messages) à traduire.
FTRA 558 Pratique de la localisation (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 658.
L’étudiante et l’étudiant apprennent dans ce cours les stratégies de localisation et les processus de localisation : la localisation de logiciels et la localisation de sites Web; les acteurs dans les projets de localisation; la situation et le travail du traducteur dans les projets de localisation; les types de fichiers à localiser : ressources, code source, fichiers d’aide, guides imprimés, matériel marketing; les types de logiciels localisés : logiciels système, logiciels de gestion, logiciels clients, logiciels multimédia, logiciels Web.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 658 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 568 Web, technologies, traduction : théories et critiques (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 668.
Ce séminaire examine de façon critique les pratiques contemporaines issues de la mondialisation et du monde numérique affectant les technologies, le Web multilingue et la traduction. Entre autres aspects, sont examinés les enjeux culturels, sociaux, techniques et idéologiques. Le séminaire met l'accent sur la traduction et la communication mondiale.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 668 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 598 Étude avancée d’un sujet particulier / Special Topics (3 crédits)
HENV 801 Pedagogical Training (3 credits)
The objective of this course is to ensure that all PhD students acquire strong teaching and other communication skills which are useful for both academic and non-academic positions. Candidates are required to attend a seminar in university teaching in collaboration with the Centre for Teaching and Learning Services of Concordia University. Following the successful completion of this seminar, candidates are required to give four lectures (normally 75 minutes each) to undergraduate classes. The course is graded on a pass/fail basis.
HENV 802 Experiential Learning (3 credits)
The objective of this course is to ensure that all students acquire some practical experience in their field of research. Candidates are required to work for a minimum of 200 hours (either full-time or part-time) in either the private sector in a field relevant to their doctoral research, in a research laboratory based outside Concordia University, in a non-profit organization or in the government. The course is graded on a pass/fail basis.
HENV 805 Research Proposal Seminar (3 credits)
Conceptual and methodological frameworks related to human interventions in the environment in the built, social and natural environment are examined through various student presentations and exchanges on their research topic. This course includes completion of the oral presentation of the research proposal.
HENV 810 Thesis Proposal (3 credits)
Students are required to select their research topic and formulate a thesis proposal under the supervision of a thesis supervisor and with input from a supervisory committee. The written proposal includes a sound rationale for the proposed research, a detailed description of the research design and methodology, and a comprehensive literature review. The thesis proposal is assessed by the supervisory committee and approved by the Graduate Program Director.
HENV 885 Comprehensive Exam (6 credits)
The comprehensive exam is prepared in consultation with the supervisory committee and aims to ensure that the student has a sound knowledge of three areas of concentration within his or her field of research. The examining committee consists of the supervisory committee plus one additional member of the Department of Geography, Planning and Environment and is chaired by the Graduate Program Director. The student is evaluated on the quality of the written and oral responses to questions.
HENV 895 Research and Thesis (66 credits)
A major portion of the doctoral program involves the planning and execution of innovative and original research under the direction of a supervisor or two co-supervisors. The thesis is examined by a Thesis Examining Committee and is defended orally.
Elective Courses
HENV 605 Advanced Qualitative Research Methods (3 credits)
This course considers some of the foundational theories that inform contemporary research in the fields of Human Geography and Urban Studies. It also explores a spectrum of qualitative research paradigms, theories and advanced methodologies relevant to social science. of qualitative research paradigms, theories and methodologies relevant to social science.
HENV 610 Advanced Quantitative Research Methods (3 credits)
This course considers experimental design and advanced data analysis methods in Geography and Environmental Sciences. The course focuses on statistical analysis of quantitative data, using the R programming environment. Specific topics include data exploration and plotting,advanced statistical tests, linear regression, statistical model selection, non-parametric tests and mixed effects models.
HENV 620 Sustainable Transportation (3 credits)
This advanced seminar explores the different elements of what is broadly known as sustainable transportation. It considers the importance as well as the negative impacts of transport systems, and how these are described and captured methodologically. Of critical importance is the intimate link between land-use and transportation systems.
HENV 625 Sustainable Resource Management (3 credits)
This seminar examines the impact of human activities on natural resources. Topics such as integrated management and exploitation practices, biodiversity and conservation, focusing particularly on forest and water resources from physical, chemical, biological, socio-economic, and technological perspectives are investigated.
HENV 630 Theories of Society and Space (3 credits)
Human Geography is informed by a range of theories that have developed inside and outside the discipline. This course introduces students to some of the most influential of these theories as well as to theoretically-informed geographical literature. While students are exposed to foundational theories, the course focuses on critical geographical work that seeks to interpret the present moment.
HENV 635 Spatial Analysis (3 credits)
This course examines analytical methods for handling specifically spatial data, where the arrangement of observations in space is thought to be of significance. The emphasis is on the choice and application of appropriate methods for the analysis of various types of data that are encountered in Geography, Planning, and Environmental Studies. Procedures for analyzing spatial distributions of phenomena, temporal dynamics and change are examined in relation to Geographical Information Systems (GIS) tools and statistical techniques.
HENV 640 (Re)shaping the City (3 credits)
By relying on an array of theoretical formulations informed by political economy, economic geography, urban morphology, urban sociology, anthropology and ecology, this seminar explores various social processes that contribute to the shaping and reshaping of our cities’ material and spatial forms.
HENV 645 Behaviour and the Urban Environment (3 credits)
This course provides a basic understanding of the relationship between people and the urban environment. The focus is on the collective and individual responses of people to the built or designed environment, and the way in which these responses can be used to guide projects, plans and policies. The basic studies for the location of commercial facilities and the modelling of human spatial behaviour are introduced.
HENV 650 The Political-Economy of the City (3 credits)
This course explores the implications of economic globalization and neoliberalism for urban life in late capitalist (post-1970s) period. Drawing on literatures from the fields of planning, geography, and political economy, it focuses on how urban policies and services are being restructured and how these changes affect different social groups.
HENV 655 Environmental Modelling (3 credits)
The different approaches to modelling the bio-physical, built or human environment are examined. The conceptualization of simple models to examine how human interventions affect the environment is investigated. Different modelling approaches such as system models, computer visualization and simulation are covered. Students develop a model scheme related to their thesis topic. Lectures and laboratory.
HENV 660 Climate Change and Sustainability (3 credits)
This seminar examines the interface between climate science, and the demands and challenges of developing sustainable human societies. Class discussions are oriented around current literature on topics such as the potential impacts of climate change on vulnerable communities, strategies to enhance resilience and increase global equity in climate mitigation efforts, and opportunities to develop sustainable energy systems. The course also includes quantitative analysis and visualization of spatial change datasets.
HENV 665 Special Topics Seminar (3 credits)
This course is designed to meet the special needs of individual graduate students. Topics vary to permit investigation of current and developing theories and research areas. Content involves presentation, discussion, and critical analysis of information from relevant scientific literature. The course will also take advantage of visiting expertise.
HENV 670 Environmental Governance (3 credits)
This course examines the principles, practices and institutions involved in environmental conservation and management as well as the sustainable exploitation of natural resources. Topics include sustainability, the precautionary principle, social capital, adaptive capacity, common property resource theories, deliberative democracy, environmental justice and environmental conflict resolution. Attention is given to issues of scale, particularly the mismatch of spatial, temporal and functional scales that characterize unsustainable management and use practices.
HENV 675 Community-Based Conservation (3 credits)
This course addresses the question of community participation in conservation and development initiatives. Focusing on the particular experience of local communities, it presents participatory concepts, principles, tools, and processes that have practical application to a broad range of contexts and settings.
Note: Students who have received credit for GEOG 607 may not take this course for credit.
HENV 680 Advanced Seminar in Environmental Science (3 credits)
This course provides an overview of current research in environmental and related scientific disciplines. The course involves seminars, presentations, and critical analysis of scientific literature, including discussion of cutting-edge research topics in fields such as ecological restoration, biodiversity, climate change, renewable energy, food and water security, and natural resource conservation.
HENV 690 Seminar in Social and Cultural Geography (3 credits)
This seminar introduces students to some important contemporary geographical approaches and topics in the study of society and culture. Specific themes may include globalization, migration, multiculturalism and diaspora, marginality, policing and imprisonment, and social movements. To provide a broad understanding of these themes, the course emphasizes analyses that draw upon geographical concepts of space, place, identity, and power.
ENVS 601 EA: Concepts, Principles and Practice (6 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
This course aims to provide students with theoretical and practical knowledge related to environmental assessment and its role in project planning and policy development. The evolution of environmental assessment (EA), its current practices and functions, and future directions arediscussed. The roles and components of EA and EA procedures in Canada (at both the federal and provincial levels) are emphasized. Guest speakers, regular readings and in-class discussions supplement the lectures.
ENVS 608 Getting Ready for the EA Internship (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
Students gain an understanding of the internship process and acquire information necessary to prepare for the work involved in securing an internship. Workshops on professional development help students prepare for and secure internship placements, and enhance their report writing and oral presentation skills. The course includes four workshops: 1) Internship requirement and timeline, 2) Resumé writing and interview techniques, 3) Writing of final report and preparation for oral presentation, and 4) Basic concepts of project management. Students are required to assess the written internship reports and oral presentations of their peers. The course is graded on a pass/fail basis.
ENVS 652 Data Collection and Analysis for EA (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
This course focuses on methods and issues in data collection and analysis appropriate for impact prediction in the abiotic, biotic and built environment, including air, surface and ground water, soil, landscape, biodiversity, noise, cultural and socio-economic conditions.
Note: Students who have received credit for ENVS 662 may not take this course for credit.
ENVS 653 Geographical Information Systems for EA (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
This course examines the use of Geographical Information Systems (GIS) in Environmental  Assessment (EA), particularly focusing on the role of GIS in the analysis of environmental data and in decision-making processes. Topics covered include data acquisition, multi-criteria decision analysis, fuzzy sets and interpolation techniques. The course comprises lectures, lab exercises and case study analysis. The instruction is built around a series of practical exercises mainly using industry-standard GIS software. The objective of the course is to provide a sound theoretical and practical background in the use of geospatial technologies for EA applications.
Note: Students who have received credit for ENVS 663 may not take this course for credit.
ENVS 664 Field Course in EA (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
The goal of this course is to expose students to practical issues related to Environmental Assessment (EA). The course comprises: (1) in-class preparation meetings followed by (2) a one-week in-field experience. During this week, students meet practitioners and individuals from local communities, industries and/or governments involved in EA. Through these interactions, students are exposed to a diverse range of perspectives and experiences related to EA. The course is validated through an assessment of the knowledge acquired during the trip. Students are responsible for the cost of food, accommodation and transportation associated with the one-week field trip (cost varies depending on destination).
Note: Students who have received credit for ENVS 662 may not take this course for credit.
ENVS 668 Indigenous Peoples and Environmental Assessment (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
Development projects are often located on or adjacent to Indigenous territories with significant impacts on their lands, lives and cultures. As such, Indigenous peoples require unique consideration within EA frameworks which should respect Indigenous and treaty rights, including international commitments (e.g. UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples) and court rulings related to: (1) Free, Prior, and Informed Consent (FPIC) for development proposed on Indigenous lands; and (2) the inclusion of Indigenous knowledge and perspectives in decision-making. This seminar course surveys recent developments in these areas and explores the potential of EA to contribute to reconciliation between Indigenous and non-Indigenous peoples in Canada (and elsewhere).
Elective Courses
BIOL 618 Ecology for Environmentalists (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
This course discusses the principles of the ecology of individuals, populations, communities and ecosystems and the effects of environmental disturbances ranging from immediate pollution to long-term climate change.
Note 1: Students who have received credit for BIOL 508 may not take this course for credit.
Note 2: Students registered in a graduate program in Biology may not take this course for credit.
ECON 659 Economics for Environmentalists (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
This course considers one of the most serious problems facing our global civilization: the on-going conflict between economic activity and the bio-physical world upon which all human activity ultimately depends. The course explains the basic theoretical framework most economists use to describe economic activities and the relationship between these activities and the natural world. Understanding the logical apparatus of economics theory shows why market forces and environmental integrity are often in conflict and why economic arguments dominate environmental policy debates at both national and international levels.
Note 1: Students who have received credit for ECON 559 may not take this course for credit.
Note 2: Students registered in programs in Economics, or programs in the John Molson School of Business, may not take this course for credit.
ENVS 604 Environmental Law and Policy (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Programme Director.
This course introduces students to environmental law and policy at the international, North American and regional levels with an emphasis on Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) as a tool for promoting environmentally sound and sustainable development. The course provides an overview of issues such as environmental security, Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA), banking and environmental finance, access to justice in environmental decision making, climate change, biodiversity, and green growth. The role of international organizations and Multilateral Environmental Agreements (MEAs) is given particular attention.
ENVS 605 Environmental Standards (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
This course provides an overview of the International Standards Organization (ISO) standards and guidelines for industry to implement a sound Environmental Management System (EMS). These guidelines are outlined in a series of publications designated as ISO 14000. Topics covered will include: the evolution and benefits of EMS, the ISO 14001 principles, integration between ISO 9001 and 14001, the registration process, auditing an EMS, life cycle assessment, and environmental labelling. Upon successful completion of the course, students are encouraged to pursue formal accreditation.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under an ENVS 505 number may not take this course for credit.
ENVS 620 Advanced Topics in Environmental Assessment (3 credits)
This course focuses on selected topics within the discipline. Topics vary to permit investigation of current and developing theories and research areas.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. ENVS 620A, ENVS 620B, etc.
GEOG 607 Indigenous Peoples and the Environment (3 credits)
This course provides an extended, in-depth exploration of the relationships and roles of Indigenous peoples with respect to their traditional territories and natural resources. Indigenous ontologies and epistemologies are highlighted in addition to Indigenous aspirations and approaches for use and stewardship of the environment. The course examines theoretical and case-study literature, with a broad regional focus on Aboriginal peoples in Canada while also drawing from comparative international experiences of Indigenous peoples.
GEOG 620 Special Topics in Geography (3 credits)
This course focuses on selected topics within the discipline. Topics vary to permit investigation of current and developing theories and research areas.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. GEOG 620A, GEOG 620B, etc.
HENV 610 Advanced Quantitative Research Methods (3 credits)
This course considers experimental design and advanced data analysis methods in Geography and Environmental Sciences. The course focuses on statistical analysis of quantitative data, using the R programming environment. Specific topics include data exploration and plotting, advanced statistical tests, linear regression, statistical model selection, non-parametric tests and mixed effects models.
HENV 625 Sustainable Resource Management (3 credits)
This seminar examines the impact of human activities on natural resources. Topics such as integrated management and exploitation practices, biodiversity and conservation, focusing particularly on forest and water resources from physical, chemical, biological, socio-economic, and technological perspectives are investigated.
HENV 660 Climate Change and Sustainability (3 credits)
This seminar examines the interface between climate science, and the demands and challenges of developing sustainable human societies. Class discussions are oriented around current literature on topics such as the potential impacts of climate change on vulnerable communities, strategies to enhance resilience and increase global equity in climate mitigation efforts, and opportunities to develop sustainable energy systems. The course also includes quantitative analysis and visualization of spatial change datasets.
HENV 655 Environmental Modelling (3 credits)
The different approaches to modelling the bio-physical, built or human environment are examined. The conceptualization of simple models to examine how human interventions affect the environment is investigated. Different modelling approaches such as system models, computer visualization and simulation are covered. Students develop a model scheme related to their thesis topic. Lectures and laboratory.
HENV 670 Environmental Governance (3 credits)
This course examines the principles, practices and institutions involved in environmental conservation and management as well as the sustainable exploitation of natural resources. Topics include sustainability, the precautionary principle, social capital, adaptive capacity, common property resource theories, deliberative democracy, environmental justice and environmental conflict resolution. Attention is given to issues of scale, particularly the mismatch of spatial, temporal and functional scales that characterize unsustainable management and use practices.
HENV 675 Community-Based Conservation (3 credits)
This course addresses the question of community participation in conservation and development initiatives. Focusing on the particular experience of local communities, it presents participatory concepts, principles, tools, and processes that have practical application to a broad range of contexts and settings.
Note: Students who have received credit for GEOG 607 may not take this course for credit.
HENV 680 Advanced Seminar in Environmental Science (3 credits)
This course provides an overview of current research in environmental and related scientific disciplines. The course involves seminars, presentations, and critical analysis of scientific literature, including discussion of cutting-edge research topics in fields such as ecological restoration, biodiversity, climate change, renewable energy, food and water security, and natural resource conservation.
Internship and Report
ENVS 696 Internship and Report in EA (18 credits)
Prerequisite: Completion of all course work (27 credits), a minimum GPA of 3.30 and permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
This internship is a 4-month placement in industry, government, and non-government where EA work is being undertaken. It is intended to maximize the educational experience and bridge the gap between what employers consider necessary job skills and what the university considers essential knowledge. Students prepare an internship report and present it orally.
Note: Students are assisted in their efforts to obtain a relevant placement by the Internship Coordinator. Placements must be approved by the EA Graduate Program Director.
HENV 605 Advanced Qualitative Research Methods (3 credits)
This course considers some of the foundational theories that inform contemporary research in the fields of Human Geography and Urban Studies. It also explores a spectrum of qualitative research paradigms, theories and advanced methodologies relevant to social science. of qualitative research paradigms, theories and methodologies relevant to social science.
HENV 610 Advanced Quantitative Research Methods (3 credits)
This course considers experimental design and advanced data analysis methods in Geography and Environmental Sciences. The course focuses on statistical analysis of quantitative data, using the R programming environment. Specific topics include data exploration and plotting, advanced statistical tests, linear regression, statistical model selection, non-parametric tests and mixed effects models.
HENV 615 Research Proposal Seminar (3 credits)
This seminar provides an opportunity to extend, deepen, and apply the conceptual and methodological frameworks presented in the core and elective courses, through a combination of classroom discussions and attendance at departmental research seminars. Students are taught research and presentation skills and are guided through the process of preparing their thesis research proposal. Students need to submit a written research proposal to their thesis research supervisor(s) as a requirement for this course.
HENV 685 Thesis Proposal (3 credits)
Students are required to select their research topic and formulate a research proposal under the supervision of a thesis supervisor and with input from a thesis committee. The written proposal will include a sound rationale for the proposed research, a detailed description of the research design and methodology, and a comprehensive literature review. Students are also required to present an oral presentation of their proposal to the Department. The thesis proposal must be formally approved by the thesis committee and the Graduate Program Director before research activities can begin. The thesis proposal should be completed before the end of the second semester of residency in the Program and after a minimum of 6 credits in the Program have been taken.
HENV 695 Thesis (30 credits)
Students are required to demonstrate their ability to carry out original, independent research. The thesis, which will be researched and written under the direction of a supervisor and thesis committee, should normally not exceed 100 pages. Upon completion of the thesis, the student will be required to defend his/her thesis before an external examiner and his/her thesis committee.
Elective Courses
GEOG 620 Special Topics in Geography (3 credits)
This course focuses on selected topics within the discipline. Topics vary to permit investigation of current and developing theories and research areas.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. GEOG 620A, GEOG 620B, etc.
GEOG 625 Directed Studies (3 credits)
With written permission of the graduate program director, a student studies a particular field or topic relating to geography, urban or environment studies. A detailed outline of the proposed study, approved by a study supervisor is required.
HENV 620 Sustainable Transportation (3 credits)
This advanced seminar explores the different elements of what is broadly known as sustainable transportation. It considers the importance as well as the negative impacts of transport systems, and how these are described and captured methodologically. Of critical importance is the intimate link between land-use and transportation systems.
HENV 625 Sustainable Resource Management (3 credits)
This seminar examines the impact of human activities on natural resources. Topics such as integrated management and exploitation practices, biodiversity and conservation, focusing particularly on forest and water resources from physical, chemical, biological, socio-economic, and technological perspectives are investigated.
HENV 630 Theories of Society and Space (3 credits)
Human Geography is informed by a range of theories that have developed inside and outside the discipline. This course introduces students to some of the most influential of these theories as well as to theoretically-informed geographical literature. While students are exposed to foundational theories, the course focuses on critical geographical work that seeks to interpret the present moment.
HENV 635 Spatial Analysis (3 credits)
This course examines analytical methods for handling specifically spatial data, where the arrangement of observations in space is thought to be of significance. The emphasis is on the choice and application of appropriate methods for the analysis of various types of data that are encountered in Geography, Planning and Environmental Studies. Procedures for analyzing spatial distributions of phenomena, temporal dynamics and change are examined in relation to Geographical Information Systems (GIS) tools and statistical techniques.
HENV 640 (Re)shaping the City (3 credits)
By relying on an array of theoretical formulations informed by political economy, economic geography, urban morphology, urban sociology, anthropology and ecology, this seminar explores various social processes that contribute to the shaping and reshaping of our cities’ material and spatial forms.
HENV 645 Behaviour and the Urban Environment (3 credits)
This course provides a basic understanding of the relationship between people and the urban environment. The focus is on the collective and individual responses of people to the built or designed environment, and the way in which these responses can be used to guide projects, plans and policies. The basic studies for the location of commercial facilities and the modelling of human spatial behaviour are introduced.
HENV 650 The Political Economy of the City (3 credits)
This course explores the implications of economic globalization and neoliberalism for urban life in late capitalist (post-1970s) period. Drawing on literatures from the fields of planning, geography, and political economy, it focuses on how urban policies and services are being restructured and how these changes affect different social groups.
HENV 655 Environmental Modelling (3 credits)
The different approaches to modelling the bio-physical, built or human environment are examined. The conceptualization of simple models to examine how human interventions affect the environment is investigated. Different modelling approaches such as system models, computer visualization and simulation are covered. Students develop a model scheme related to their thesis topic. Lectures and laboratory.
HENV 660 Climate Change and Sustainability (3 credits)
This seminar examines the interface between climate science, and the demands and challenges of developing sustainable human societies. Class discussions are oriented around current literature on topics such as the potential impacts of climate change on vulnerable communities, strategies to enhance resilience and increase global equity in climate mitigation efforts, and opportunities to develop sustainable energy systems. The course also includes quantitative analysis and visualization of spatial change datasets.
HENV 665 Special Topics Seminar (3 credits)
This course is designed to meet the special needs of individual graduate students. Topics vary to permit investigation of current and developing theories and research areas. Content involves presentation, discussion, and critical analysis of information from relevant scientific literature. The course will also take advantage of visiting expertise.
HENV 670 Environmental Governance (3 credits)
This course examines the principles, practices and institutions involved in environmental conservation and management as well as the sustainable exploitation of natural resources. Topics include sustainability, the precautionary principle, social capital, adaptive capacity, common property resource theories, deliberative democracy, environmental justice and environmental conflict resolution. Attention is given to issues of scale, particularly the mismatch of spatial, temporal and functional scales that characterize unsustainable management and use practices.
HENV 675 Community-Based Conservation (3 credits)
This course addresses the question of community participation in conservation and development initiatives. Focusing on the particular experience of local communities, it presents participatory concepts, principles, tools, and processes that have practical application to a broad range of contexts and settings.
Note: Students who have received credit for GEOG 607 may not take this course for credit.
HENV 680 Advanced Seminar in Environmental Science (3 credits)
This course provides an overview of current research in environmental and related scientific disciplines. The course involves seminars, presentations, and critical analysis of scientific literature, including discussion of cutting-edge research topics in fields such as ecological restoration, biodiversity, climate change, renewable energy, food and water security, and natural resource conservation.
HENV 690 Seminar in Social and Cultural Geography (3 credits)
This seminar introduces students to some important contemporary geographical approaches and topics in the study of society and culture. Specific themes may include globalization, migration, multiculturalism and diaspora, marginality, policing and imprisonment, and social movements. To provide a broad understanding of these themes, the course emphasizes analyses that draw upon geographical concepts of space, place, identity, and power.
ENVS 601 EA: Concepts, Principles and Practice (6 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
This course aims to provide students with theoretical and practical knowledge related to environmental assessment and its role in project planning and policy development. The evolution of environmental assessment (EA), its current practices and functions, and future directions arediscussed. The roles and components of EA and EA procedures in Canada (at both the federal and provincial levels) are emphasized. Guest speakers, regular readings and in-class discussions supplement the lectures.
ENVS 652 Data Collection and Analysis for EA (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
This course focuses on methods and issues in data collection and analysis appropriate for impact prediction in the abiotic, biotic and built environment, including air, surface and ground water, soil, landscape, biodiversity, noise, cultural and socio-economic conditions.
Note: Students who have received credit for ENVS 662 many take this course for credit.
ENVS 653 Geographical Information Systems for EA (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
This course examines the use of Geographical Information Systems (GIS) in Environmental  Assessment (EA), particularly focusing on the role of GIS in the analysis of environmental data and in decision-making processes. Topics covered include data acquisition multi-criteria decision analysis, fuzzy sets and interpolation techniques. The course comprises lectures, lab exercises and case study analysis. The instruction is built around a series of practical exercises mainly using industry-standard GIS software. The objective of the course is to provide a sound theoretical and practical background in the use of geospatial technologies for EA applications.
Note: Students who have received credit for ENVS 663 may not take this course for credit.
ENVS 668 Indigenous Peoples and Environmental Assessment (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
Development projects are often located on or adjacent to Indigenous territories with significant impacts on their lands, lives and cultures. As such, Indigenous peoples require unique consideration within EA frameworks which should respect Indigenous and treaty rights, including international commitments (e.g. UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples) and court rulings related to: (1) Free, Prior, and Informed Consent (FPIC) for development proposed on Indigenous lands; and (2) the inclusion of Indigenous knowledge and perspectives in decision-making. This seminar course surveys recent developments in these areas and explores the potential of EA to contribute to reconciliation between Indigenous and non-Indigenous peoples in Canada (and elsewhere).
Elective Courses
BIOL 618 Ecology for Environmentalists (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
This course discusses the principles of the ecology of individuals, populations, communities and ecosystems and the effects of environmental disturbances ranging from immediate pollution to long-term climate change.
Note 1: Students who have received credit for BIOL 508 may not take this course for credit.
Note 2: Students registered in a graduate program in Biology may not take this course for credit.
ECON 659 Economics for Environmentalists (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
This course considers one of the most serious problems facing our global civilization: the on-going conflict between economic activity and the bio-physical world upon which all human activity ultimately depends. The course explains the basic theoretical framework most economists use to describe economic activities and the relationship between these activities and the natural world. Understanding the logical apparatus of economics theory shows why market forces and environmental integrity are often in conflict and why economic arguments dominate environmental policy debates at both national and international levels.
Note 1: Students who have received credit for ECON 559 may not take this course for credit.
Note 2: Students registered in programs in Economics, or programs in the John Molson School of Business, may not take this course for credit.
ENVS 604 Environmental Law and Policy (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Programme Director.
This course introduces students to environmental law and policy at the international, North American and regional levels with an emphasis on Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) as a tool for promoting environmentally sound and sustainable development. The course provides an overview of issues such as environmental security, Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA), banking and environmental finance, access to justice in environmental decision making, climate change, biodiversity, and green growth. The role of international organizations and Multilateral Environmental Agreements (MEAs) is given particular attention.
ENVS 605 Environmental Standards (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
This course provides an overview of the International Standards Organization (ISO) standards and guidelines for industry to implement a sound Environmental Management System (EMS). These guidelines are outlined in a series of publications designated as ISO 14000. Topics covered will include: the evolution and benefits of EMS, the ISO 14001 principles, integration between ISO 9001 and 14001, the registration process, auditing an EMS, life cycle assessment, and environmental labelling. Upon successful completion of the course, students are encouraged to pursue formal accreditation.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under an ENVS 505 number may not take this course for credit.
ENVS 620 Advanced Topics in Environmental Assessment (3 credits)
This course focuses on selected topics within the discipline. Topics vary to permit investigation of current and developing theories and research areas.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. ENVS 620A, ENVS 620B, etc.
ENVS 664 Field Course in EA (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
The goal of this course is to expose students to practical issues related to Environmental Assessment (EA). The course comprises: (1) in-class preparation meetings followed by (2) a one-week in-field experience. During this week, students meet practitioners and individuals from local communities, industries and/or governments involved in EA. Through these interactions, students are exposed to a diverse range of perspectives and experiences related to EA. The course is validated through an assessment of the knowledge acquired during the trip. Students are responsible for the cost of food, accommodation and transportation associated with the one-week field trip (cost varies depending on destination).
Note: Students who have received credit for ENVS 662 may not take this course for credit.
GEOG 607 Indigenous Peoples and the Environment (3 credits)
This course provides an extended, in-depth exploration of the relationships and roles of Indigenous peoples with respect to their traditional territories and natural resources. Indigenous ontologies and epistemologies are highlighted in addition to Indigenous aspirations and approaches for use and stewardship of the environment. The course examines theoretical and case-study literature, with a broad regional focus on Aboriginal peoples in Canada while also drawing from comparative international experiences of Indigenous peoples.
GEOG 620 Special Topics in Geography (3 credits)
This course focuses on selected topics within the discipline. Topics vary to permit investigation of current and developing theories and research areas.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. GEOG 620A, GEOG 620B, etc.
HENV 610 Advanced Quantitative Research Methods (3 credits)
This course considers experimental design and advanced data analysis methods in Geography and Environmental Sciences. The course focuses on statistical analysis of quantitative data, using the R programming environment. Specific topics include data exploration and plotting, advanced statistical tests, linear regression, statistical model selection, non-parametric tests and mixed effects models.
HENV 625 Sustainable Resource Management (3 credits)
This seminar examines the impact of human activities on natural resources. Topics such as integrated management and exploitation practices, biodiversity and conservation, focusing particularly on forest and water resources from physical, chemical, biological, socio-economic, and technological perspectives are investigated.
HENV 660 Climate Change and Sustainability (3 credits)
This seminar examines the interface between climate science, and the demands and challenges of developing sustainable human societies. Class discussions are oriented around current literature on topics such as the potential impacts of climate change on vulnerable communities, strategies to enhance resilience and increase global equity in climate mitigation efforts, and opportunities to develop sustainable energy systems. The course also includes quantitative analysis and visualization of spatial change datasets.
HENV 655 Environmental Modelling (3 credits)
The different approaches to modelling the bio-physical, built or human environment are examined. The conceptualization of simple models to examine how human interventions affect the environment is investigated. Different modelling approaches such as system models, computer visualization and simulation are covered. Students develop a model scheme related to their thesis topic. Lectures and laboratory.
HENV 670 Environmental Governance (3 credits)
This course examines the principles, practices and institutions involved in environmental conservation and management as well as the sustainable exploitation of natural resources. Topics include sustainability, the precautionary principle, social capital, adaptive capacity, common property resource theories, deliberative democracy, environmental justice and environmental conflict resolution. Attention is given to issues of scale, particularly the mismatch of spatial, temporal and functional scales that characterize unsustainable management and use practices.
HENV 675 Community-Based Conservation (3 credits)
This course addresses the question of community participation in conservation and development initiatives. Focusing on the particular experience of local communities, it presents participatory concepts, principles, tools, and processes that have practical application to a broad range of contexts and settings.
Note: Students who have received credit for GEOG 607 may not take this course for credit.
HENV 680 Advanced Seminar in Environmental Science (3 credits)
This course provides an overview of current research in environmental and related scientific disciplines. The course involves seminars, presentations, and critical analysis of scientific literature, including discussion of cutting-edge research topics in fields such as ecological restoration, biodiversity, climate change, renewable energy, food and water security, and natural resource conservation.
HEXS 801 Scientific Communication and Pedagogy in Health and Exercise Science (3 credits), HEXS 820 Special Topics in Health and Exercise Science (3 credits).
6 credits chosen from HEXS 810, 811 or 812 Advanced Topics in Health and Exercise Science.
Comprehensive Exam in Health and Exercise Science. HEXS 850 (6 credits). The examining committee consists of the student’s supervisory committee and is chaired by the Graduate Program Director. The student is evaluated on the basis of the quality of the oral and written presentations and on the responses to the questions from the examining committee.
Research Proposal in Health and Exercise Science. HEXS 851 (3 credits). Students are required to write a research proposal describing a series of projects leading to the production of new knowledge from hypothesis-driven data acquisition and experimental inquiry. A supervisory committee including the supervisor and three additional faculty members (often the same as the comprehensive examination) with varied expertise related to the thesis topic is formed to guide the student with the production of the proposal. The proposal is presented in written form to the committee, and in oral form to the committee and department.
Research and Thesis in Health and Exercise Science. HEXS 890 (69 credits). Students are required to write a PhD research thesis, consisting of the production of new research knowledge from hypothesis-driven data acquisition and experimental inquiry. The research project should involve the integration of knowledge from the health sciences.The thesis is examined by a Thesis Examining Committee and is defended orally.
Academic Regulations
Academic Standing. Please refer to the Academic Standing section of the Calendar for a detailed review of the Academic Regulations.
Program Specific Requirements. Students must obtain an assessment grade point average (AGPA) of 3.00 based on a minimum of 6 credits.
Residence. The minimum residence requirement is two years (six terms) of full-time study beyond the master’s degree, or three years (nine terms) of full-time study beyond the bachelor’s degree.
Time Limit. All work for the doctoral degree must be completed by the end of the fourth calendar year following the year of admission to candidacy, defined as successful completion of the Comprehensive Exam in Health and Exercise Science (HEXS 850) and the Research Proposal in Health and Exercise Science (HEXS 851). Please refer to the Academic Regulation page for further details regarding the Time Limit requirements.
Graduation Requirement. In order to graduate, students must have a cumulative GPA of 3.00.
Courses
HEXS 801 Scientific Communication and Pedagogy in Health and Exercise Science (3 credits)
This course meets the needs of graduate students in developing adequate skills to communicate scientific information efficiently to different interest groups, such as grant adjudication committees, the general public, or undergraduate and graduate students in an academic setting. It serves in developing scientific communication skills by focusing on written and oral presentation skills, aimed at the scientists, students, or lay public. Faculty members from the department and selected guests provide information and applications on successful approaches to reach each of these groups. On the pedagogical side, it includes the development of course objectives and a course outline, along with preparing and presenting a lecture at the undergraduate level. It also involves presentation, discussion, and critical analysis of information from current scientific journal literature for scientists.
HEXS 810 Advanced Topics in Health and Exercise Science: Physiology Module (3 credits)
This course examines the fundamental mechanisms and the functional control of specific systems of the body. A detailed analysis of the system, including the molecular and systemic aspects of the given system is addressed. This course focuses on recent research outcomes and new issues in molecular and systemic physiology. The course content varies depending on the specific system studied.
HEXS 811 Advanced Topics in Health and Exercise Science: Intervention Module (3 credits)
This course examines concepts in the rehabilitation process from exercise adherence to tissue healing, and introduces students to various exercise protocols specific to the selected area of study. Students learn how to implement safe and effective rehabilitation protocols to address dysfunction and functional recovery. This course focuses on recent research outcomes and new issues in rehabilitation specific to prevention, assessment, and rehabilitation of injuries. The course content varies depending on the area of rehabilitation.
HEXS 812 Advanced Topics in Health and Exercise Science: Population Health Module (3 credits)
This course surveys the health-related aspects of exercise, physical activity, and physical fitness from a population health perspective. Topics include current debates in biomedical ethics, health policy, as well as, methods and concepts in behavioural and environmental determinants of activity and fitness.
HEXS 820 Special Topics in Health and Exercise Science (3 credits)
This course provides students with flexibility to address a specific area of specialization in Health and Exercise Science. This can be a reading course organized by the supervisor, a course chosen from the list of Advanced Topics courses, or a similar-level course from another department or institution, while being related to a specialization in Health and Exercise Science. The course is chosen in consultation with the student's supervisory committee. The course can be internal or external, and provides students with the capacity to specialize even further in relation to their research project.
HEXS 850 Comprehensive Exam in Health and Exercise Science (6 credits)
The comprehensive exam is given by an examination committee composed of selected faculty members, at the end of the first year of study. The committee includes the supervisor and three additional faculty members with varied expertise related to the thesis topic. The examination committee identifies selected readings for the student. The student is expected to prepare for both a written and an oral examination. The body of knowledge for the comprehensive examination is defined by the committee in the form of advanced book chapters and other scientific readings. The written exam comes first, composed of five (5) questions asked by the committee, in the form of argumentative essays written in the span of two weeks; following a satisfactory evaluation of this work, the student is convened to the oral part, comprising a series of questions coming from the panel concerning the written answers or additional aspects coming from the readings. The student has to successfully pass the comprehensive examination in order to progress to the proposal, usually the following term. The course is graded on a pass/fail basis.
HEXS 851 Research Proposal in Health and Exercise Science (3 credits)
Prerequisite: HEXS 850.
Students are required to write a research proposal describing a series of projects leading to the production of new knowledge from hypothesis-driven data acquisition and experimental inquiry. A supervisory committee including the supervisor and three additional faculty members (often the same as the comprehensive examination) with varied expertise related to the thesis topic is formed to guide the student with the production of the proposal. The proposal is presented in written form to the committee, and in oral form to the committee and department. The course is graded on a pass/fail basis.
HEXS 890 Research and Thesis in Health and Exercise Science (69 credits)
EXCI 610 – Statistics and Research Design (3 credits)
EXCI 612 – Laboratory Techniques (3 credits)
EXCI 624 – Special Topics Seminar (3 credits)
EXCI 626 – Thesis Proposal (3 credits)
EXCI 670 Thesis (33 credits)
OR
EXCI 680 – Thesis (Athletic Therapy) (33 credits)
OR
EXCI 690 – Thesis (Clinical Exercise Physiology) (33 credits)
Master of/Magisteriate in Science (Health and Exercise Science) (45 credits)
Year I
Fall (6 credits) EXCI 610 (3 credits), 624 (3 credits)
Winter (6 credits) EXCI 612 (3 credits), 626 (3 credits)
Year II
33 credits EXCI 670 (33 credits) or EXCI 680 (33 credits) or EXCI 690 (33 credits)
Course Descriptions
EXCI 610 Statistics and Research Design (3 credits)
This course provides students with a background in statistics and experimental design. Students are exposed to a variety of experimental designs applicable to the exercise sciences. The course covers the application of statistical concepts in consideration of specific experimental design methods. A number of parametric and non-parametric statistics are introduced for hypothesis testing, with the opportunity to apply relevant knowledge using various statistical software packages.
EXCI 612 Laboratory Techniques (3 credits)
The course provides a theoretical awareness of measurement principles and offers practical experience in applying techniques common to advanced research methodologies in exercise science. The potential topics to be covered are geared towards the requirements of the individual in the areas of exercise physiology and athletic therapy. These may include such topics as data acquisition and analysis, electromyography, blood flow methodologies, spectrophotometry, pulmonary gas exchange, motion analysis, and tissue histochemistry.
EXCI 624 Special Topics Seminar (3 credits)
This course is designed to meet the special needs of graduate students in the exercise science areas of concentration specific to athletic therapy and clinical exercise physiology. Topics vary within the domain to account for investigation of current and developing theories. The course involves presentation, discussion, and critical analysis of information from current scientific journal literature.
EXCI 626 Thesis Proposal (3 credits)
This course provides students with the opportunity to choose a research topic and formulate a research proposal under the supervision of a thesis advisor. The proposal should include a literature review, rationale, hypothesis, and methodology including the planned research design and data analysis. Students are required to present a seminar in the Department on their research prior to the presentation of their proposal to the thesis advisory committee.
EXCI 670 Thesis (33 credits)
Prerequisite: EXCI 626.
Students are required to demonstrate their ability to carry out independent research which reflects a scientific approach. In addition to a written final thesis, a public oral examination is conducted to test the student's ability to defend the thesis.
EXCI 680 Thesis (Athletic Therapy) (33 credits)
Prerequisite: EXCI 626.
Students are required to demonstrate their ability to carry out independent research which reflects a scientific approach. In addition to a written final thesis, a public oral examination is conducted to test the student's ability to defend the thesis.
EXCI 690 Thesis (Clinical Exercise Physiology) (33 credits)
Prerequisite: EXCI 626.
Students are required to demonstrate their ability to carry out independent research which reflects a scientific approach. In addition to a written final thesis, a public oral examination is conducted to test the student's ability to defend the thesis.
EXCI 698 Selected Topics in Exercise Science (3 credits)
This course explores themes within the area of Exercise Science.
HIST 877 Comprehensive Minor Field Tutorial (3 credits)
Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course provided that the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. HIST 877A, HIST 877B, etc.
HIST 878 Comprehensive Major Field Tutorial (6 credits)
HIST 880 Comprehensive Examinations (12 credits)
HIST 885 PhD Thesis Proposal and Colloquium (6 credits)
HIST 889 Doctoral Seminar (6 credits)
HIST 890 Thesis Research (54 credits)
HIST 600 The Nature of Historical Knowledge (3 credits)
This course examines the history of the discipline and the nature of historical knowledge, as well as contemporary debates about the meaning and practice of history. The content varies from term to term depending on the instructor(s). The material covered may include the following: research tools (e.g. library resources, the archives and the Internet), major approaches to history (e.g. Marxist, Annaliste, feminist), the debate about objectivity and truth in history, public history (history in film, television, schools, museums), and the impact of postmodernism on historical practice.
HIST 601 Historical Research Methods (3 credits)
This course guides students in the intial stages of developing an MA thesis topic and elaborating a substantial research proposal.
European History
HIST 610 Selected Topics in European History (3 credits)
Canadian History
HIST 620 Selected Topics in Canadian History (3 credits)
United States History
HIST 630 Selected Topics in US History (3 credits)
Latin American and Caribbean History
HIST 634 Selected Topics in Latin American and Caribbean History (3 credits)
Asian History
HIST 638 Selected Topics in Asian History (3 credits)
Middle Eastern History
HIST 642 Selected Topics in Middle Eastern History (3 credits)
African History
HIST 646 Selected Topics in African History (3 credits)
History of Genocide and Human Rights
HIST 650 Selected Topics in the History of Genocide and Human Rights (3 credits)
History of Gender and Sexuality
HIST 660 Selected Topics in the History of Gender and Sexuality (3 credits)
Public History
HIST 665 Selected Topics in Public History (3 credits)
Selected Areas of History
HIST 670 Selected Topics in History (3 credits)
HIST 679 Tutorial in a Selected Area of History (3 credits)
Research, Theses, and Comprehensive Examinations
HIST 685 MA Thesis (30 credits)
HUMA 891 Comprehensive Examination Major Field (3 credits)
HUMA 892 Comprehensive Examination Minor Field I (3 credits)
HUMA 893 Comprehensive Examination Minor Field II (3 credits)
Thesis Proposal with Defence (HUMA 894). Upon completion of the required coursework and three comprehensive field examinations, students are admitted to candidacy following acceptance by their advisory committee of the written thesis proposal and its successful oral defence. The thesis proposal should be integrative in character, bringing the student’s three fields to bear on the thesis project and laying the groundwork for the thesis.
Thesis (HUMA 895). A doctoral thesis should be based on extensive research in primary sources, make a significant and original contribution to knowledge, and be presented in a manner that conceptually and formally accords with scholarly standards. Students may produce a research-creation thesis with the approval of the student’s advisory committee and the Humanities Program Director. In accordance with the thesis guidelines of the School of Graduate Studies, a research-creation thesis normally comprises two synthesized components: a creative production component (which may be presented in a variety of media, communicative, or performative platforms) and a written scholarly component. The written scholarly component of the research-creation thesis should demonstrate substantial knowledge of the relevant scholarly literature, consider methodological issues, and present a contribution to knowledge. In addition, the research-creation thesis must demonstrate knowledge of prevailing practices and precedents in the practical field of activity in which the creative production component situates itself, and may reflect on the production process.
Language Requirement. Prior to submission of their thesis, doctoral candidates are required to demonstrate an ability to read and translate scholarly material in at least one language (other than the language of their thesis) relevant to their studies.
Academic Regulations
Academic Standing. Please refer to the Academic Standing section of the Calendar for a detailed review of the Academic Regulations.
Residence. The minimum residence requirement is two years (6 terms) of full-time study, or the equivalent in part-time study.
Time Limit. Please refer to the Academic Regulation page for further details regarding the Time Limit requirements.
Graduation Requirement. In order to graduate, students must have a cumulative GPA of at least 3.00.
Courses
Required Courses
HUMA 888 Seminar in Interdisciplinary Studies I (3 credits)
A required core seminar to be taken by all students within their first year in the program. This course engages with theories and methods of interdisciplinarity germane to the humanities, social sciences and fine arts, including those pertinent to research-creation. Its objectives include enhancing awareness of the role of conceptual frameworks and institutional practices in the shaping of interdisciplinary scholarly and creative explorations, and providing students with opportunities to begin pursuing theoretical and methodological issues vital to their individual interdisciplinary projects.
HUMA 889 Seminar in Interdisciplinary Studies II (3 credits)
A required core seminar to be taken by all students within their first year in the program. Each year a different topic or approach is selected with the aim of exploring how it is pursued and challenged across disciplinary boundaries.
Elective Courses
HUMA 884 Directed Studies (3 credits)
A directed study course provides students with the opportunity to pursue advanced and focused work with individual faculty members in the fields that constitute the student's program of study. Directed study courses are designated by the course topic.
HUMA 887 Advanced Seminar in Special Topics in Interdisciplinary Studies (3 credits)
This seminar examines in-depth special topics in interdisciplinary studies.
Note: The content varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may reregister for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated by the course topic following the HUMA 887 course title.
Comprehensive Examinations and Thesis
HUMA 891 Comprehensive Examination Major Field (3 credits)
HUMA 892 Comprehensive Examination Minor Field I (3 credits)
HUMA 893 Comprehensive Examination Minor Field II (3 credits)
HUMA 894 Thesis Proposal with Defence (6 credits)
HUMA 895 Thesis (57 credits)
JOUR 601 Critical Approaches to Journalistic Thought (3 credits)
JOUR 604 Research Methods for Journalism (3 credits)
JOUR 605 Digital Innovation in Journalism (3 credits)
Choose two of the following elective courses:
JOUR 502 Introduction to Reporting (3 credits)
JOUR 503 Introduction to Visual Journalism (3 credits)
JOUR 511 Introduction to Multimedia (3 credits)
JOUR 523 News and Feature Photography (3 credits)
JOUR 603 Political Economy of Journalism (3 credits)
JOUR 610 International Journalism (3 credits)
JOUR 620 Journalism Ethics and the Law (3 credits)
JOUR 630 Mediating Diversity through Audio Story-telling (3 credits)
JOUR 640 Textual Approaches to Journalism (3 credits)
JOUR 642 Special Topics in Journalism Studies (3 credits)
JOUR 645 Directed Study (3 credits)
* With the permission of the department, up to six elective credits may be taken in 600-level courses offered by other departments.
Research Requirements and Options.
Option A.
JOUR 650 Journalism Readings and Proposal (6 credits)
JOUR 691 Thesis (24 credits)
OR
Option B.
JOUR 650 Journalism Readings and Proposal (6 credits)
JOUR 693 Research-Creation Thesis (24 credits)
OR
Option C.
JOUR 694 Essay (18 credits)
12 additional course credits in consultation with the student’s faculty advisor and approved by the Department’s MA program director.
Academic Regulations
Academic Standing. Please refer to the Academic Standing section of the Calendar for a detailed review of the Academic Regulations.
Residence. The minimum residence requirement is one year (3 terms) of full-time study, or the equivalent in part-time study
Time Limit. Please refer to the Academic Regulation page for further details regarding the Time Limit requirements.
Graduation Requirement. In order to graduate, students must have a cumulative GPA of at least 2.70.
Courses
JOUR 502 Introduction to Reporting (3 credits)
This is a comprehensive lecture/laboratory course which lays the foundations for the writing and reporting demands of journalism. Students are introduced to the salient features of print and digital formats, and receive assignments in information-gathering and writing both in class and in the field.
JOUR 503 Introduction to Visual Journalism (3 credits)
This workshop course lays the foundation for the visual aspects of journalistic story-telling. Working with digital, single-lens reflex cameras, students acquire fundamental skills for the practice of visual journalism, becoming familiar with a variety of aesthetic, technical, ethical and theoretical concerns involved in the visual production of meaning.
JOUR 511 Introduction to Multimedia (3 credits)
This course is an introduction to the use of technology across audio and visual news platforms, including audio, visual and digital equipment and software. Students learn the necessary professional, technical and aesthetic skills to produce editorially sound audio and visual stories.
JOUR 523 News and Feature Photography (3 credits)
This workshop course covers a range of journalistic topics – hard news, general news, features, arts, sports – to emphasize the thematic particularities of visual story-telling. The course requires students to consider and incorporate the narrative and representative dimensions of visual journalism through a variety of assignments.
JOUR 601 Critical Approaches to Journalistic Thought (3 credits)
This course  introduces students to a scholarly critique of journalism, both as a practice and as an institution. Students examine specific readings from an overlapping social, political and economic context to consider the role of journalists as cultural producers.
JOUR 603 Political Economy of Journalism (3 credits)
This course considers journalism through its organization as a cultural industry and critically evaluates journalism’s economic structures and the impact those structures have on journalism practice. Topics may include media economics, free-market theory, media ownership, the role of the government and the role of organized labour.
JOUR 604 Research Methods for Journalism (3 credits)
This course examines a variety of research methods commonly used in the production and study of journalism, from both qualitative and quantitative perspectives. Emphasis is placed on primary sources, access to information requests, and electronic databases with a goal of helping students develop their own research practice.
JOUR 605 Digital Innovation in Journalism (3 credits)
This course offers lectures and workshops in digital innovation and web design, with a focus on design features related to journalism production and news platforms.
JOUR 610 International Journalism (3 credits)
Prerequisite: JOUR 601 previously or concurrently.
This course examines journalism as a cross-cultural and global practice, addressing such issues as media representation, multiculturalism, globalization and international news flows.
JOUR 620 Journalism Ethics and the Law (3 credits)
Prerequisite: JOUR 601 previously or concurrently or permission of the program director.
This course examines the journalist’s responsibility in terms of both ethics and the law. It introduces students to a representative cross-section of ethical theories and codes and takes an intensive look at the most common legal issues affecting the practice of journalism.
JOUR 630 Mediating Diversity through Audio Story-telling (3 credits)
Prerequisite: JOUR 601 previously or concurrently or permission of the program director.
The course is an experiential workshop that blends journalism theory and practice. Students function both as reporters, in order to learn the skills necessary to produce robust audio stories, and digital researchers tasked with examining diversity and media representation issues arising in class to explore journalism’s mediating function in society.
JOUR 640 Textual Approaches to Journalism (3 credits)
Prerequisite: JOUR 601 previously or concurrently.
This course concentrates on journalism’s use of all forms of language, from written text to sounds and images. Drawing from the literature on linguistics, semiotics, textual and discourse analysis, students consider ways in which journalists, through their use of language to describe and depict people, events, institutions and ideas, become implicated in the news they report.
JOUR 642 Special Topics in Journalism Studies (3 credits)
This seminar permits the in-depth examination of particular special topics in digital innovation in journalism studies. Topics vary from year to year.
JOUR 645 Directed Study (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the MA Program Director.
Students may enrol in a directed study under faculty supervision in order to undertake a specialized study of theoretical or research-related topics.
JOUR 650 Journalism Readings and Proposal (6 credits)
Prerequisite: JOUR 601.
In consultation with the faculty advisor, the student reviews relevant literature pertinent to the research topic and writes a thesis proposal demonstrating knowledge based upon the review of the scholarly literature.
JOUR 691 Thesis (24 credits)
Prerequisite: JOUR 650.
The thesis is researched and written under the direction of a supervisor. Upon completion, it is submitted to the student’s Thesis Committee. The thesis is defended in an oral examination before the Thesis Committee.
JOUR 693 Research-Creation Thesis (24 credits)
Prerequisite: JOUR 650.
The Research-Creation Thesis is specifically designed for students with media production experience who wish to complete an original media production using a suitable media platform, complemented by a text of approximately 10,000 words comprising a literature and media review, a theoretical and methodological contextualization, and a critical reflection on the project and its outcomes.
JOUR 694 Essay (18 credits)
Prerequisites: JOUR 601, 604, 605.
Students produce an essay on a research topic developed in consultation with a  faculty member that explores a specific issue relevant to journalism studies. The final essay must be evaluated by a second faculty member. The essay's length is approximately 40 pages, which does not include a bibliography. The course is normally taken in term five of the students' degree.
JOUR 500 Critical Approaches to Journalism (3 credits)
This course introduces students to a scholarly critique of journalism, both as a practice and as an institution. By interrogating specific readings, students are encouraged to consider the journalist as a cultural producer operating within overlapping social, political and economic contexts.
JOUR 501 Research Methods for Journalism (3 credits)
This course introduces students to research methods with a focus on primary sources, such as official documents, legal and financial records, access to information requests, electronic databases, as well as in-depth interviews. These methods are treated as both sources of story ideas and as essential elements of good reporting.
JOUR 502 Introduction to Reporting (3 credits)
This is a comprehensive lecture/laboratory course which lays the foundations for the writing and reporting demands of journalism. Students are introduced to the salient features of print and digital formats, and receive assignments in information-gathering and writing both in class and in the field.
JOUR 504 Intermediate Reporting (3 credits)
Prerequisite: JOUR 502.
This course is intended to consolidate the reporting and writing skills learned during the summer. Through lectures and laboratory work, students expand their knowledge of information-gathering and writing techniques, including short deadline news reporting and feature writing.
JOUR 505 Advanced Reporting (3 credits)
This workshop offers students the opportunity to perfect their reporting and writing skills and to undertake long form writing projects, ranging from beat reporting to magazine writing.
JOUR 508 Research Project (3 credits)
The project is to be a comprehensive study and report on some area of modern media practice, or on the interaction of media and society. The subject and method must be approved in advance by the instructor of the course.
JOUR 510 Web Editing and Page Design (3 credits)
Prerequisite: JOUR 501.
This course offers lectures and workshops in web editing and page design. Specific focus is given to design features related to journalism production and news platforms.
JOUR 511 Introduction to Multimedia (3 credits)
This course is an introduction to the use of technology across audio and visual news platforms, including audio, visual and digital equipment and software. Students learn the necessary professional, technical and aesthetic skills to produce editorially sound audio and visual stories.
JOUR 513 Journalism Ethics and the Law (3 credits)
This course examines the journalist’s responsibility in terms of both ethics and the law. It introduces students to a representative cross-section of ethical theories and codes and takes an intensive look at the most common legal issues affecting the practice of journalism.
JOUR 528 The Digital Magazine (3 credits)
This course requires students to produce the Department’s Digital Magazine. The course replicates the working conditions and journalistic experience of a digital newsroom. Students are expected to work in editorial teams to create current and update multimedia content throughout the term.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a JOUR 525 number may not take this course for credit.
JOUR 530 Advanced Radio News (3 credits)
This is a workshop course in which students function as reporters, writers, news readers and editors in order to learn the skills necessary to produce daily newscasts.
JOUR 532 Documentary Video and Radio (3 credits)
This workshop allows students to perfect their skills in long format public affairs broadcasting in sound and pictures. Students learn the fundamentals of documentary production including story developments and treatment,cinematographic style, interviewing, editing and presentation.
JOUR 536 Advanced Video Journalism (3 credits)
This course gives students the opportunity to perfect their skills in writing and reporting for video journalism and producing news and public affairs programming.
JOUR 542 International Journalism (3 credits)
This course examines the way journalism is practiced in a selected country or tradition. The focus of the course may change from year to year.
JOUR 566 Photojournalism (3 credits)
Using digital cameras and technology, students perform a variety of exercises and assignments to help them master the techniques used in planning, taking, and laying out news photographs.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a JOUR 525 number may not take this course for credit.
JOUR 500 Critical Approaches to Journalism (3 credits)
This course introduces students to a scholarly critique of journalism, both as a practice and as an institution. By interrogating specific readings, students are encouraged to consider the journalist as a cultural producer operating within overlapping social, political and economic contexts.
JOUR 501 Research Methods for Journalism (3 credits)
This course introduces students to research methods with a focus on primary sources, such as official documents, legal and financial records, access to information requests, electronic databases, as well as in-depth interviews. These methods are treated as both sources of story ideas and as essential elements of good reporting.
JOUR 502 Introduction to Reporting (3 credits)
This is a comprehensive lecture/laboratory course which lays the foundations for the writing and reporting demands of journalism. Students are introduced to the salient features of print and digital formats, and receive assignments in information-gathering and writing both in class and in the field.
JOUR 503 Introduction to Visual Journalism (3 credits)
This workshop course lays the foundation for the visual aspects of journalistic story-telling. Working with digital, single-lens reflex cameras, students acquire fundamental skills for the practice of visual journalism, becoming familiar with a variety of aesthetic, technical, ethical and theoretical concerns involved in the visual production of meaning.
JOUR 507 Basics of Digital Imaging (3 credits)
This workshop course introduces students to the fundamental concepts of editing news photographs. Working with actual news photographs and editing software, students learn to weigh aesthetic and technical considerations with the ethical and theoretical aspects involved in the visual production of meaning.
JOUR 508 Research Project (3 credits)
The project is to be a comprehensive study and report on some area of modern media practice, or on the interaction of media and society. The subject and method must be approved in advance by the instructor of the course.
JOUR 511 Introduction to Multimedia (3 credits)
This course is an introduction to the use of technology across audio and visual news platforms, including audio, visual and digital equipment and software. Students learn the necessary professional, technical and aesthetic skills to produce editorially sound audio and visual stories.
JOUR 513 Journalism Ethics and the Law (3 credits)
This course examines the journalist’s responsibility in terms of both ethics and the law. It introduces students to a representative cross-section of ethical theories and codes and takes an intensive look at the most common legal issues affecting the practice of journalism.
JOUR 521 Visual Story-Telling (3 credits)
This workshop introduces students to the dynamic and aural elements of visual story-telling in the context of multi-platform journalism. Students acquire technical skills of video and sound capture through instruction that brings to bear aesthetic, ethical and theoretical considerations.
JOUR 523 News and Feature Photography (3 credits)
This workshop course covers a range of journalistic topics – hard news, general news, features, arts, sports – to emphasize the thematic particularities of visual story-telling. The course requires students to consider and incorporate the narrative and representative dimensions of visual journalism through a variety of assignments.
JOUR 527 Elements of Lighting for Visual Journalism (3 credits)
This workshop course introduces students to lighting techniques for both still photography and video story-telling. Students learn to weigh technical and aesthetic aspects of lighting with the ethical and theoretical dimensions involved in the manipulation or alteration of the shooting environment.
JOUR 528 The Digital Magazine (3 credits)
This course requires students to produce the Department’s Digital Magazine. The course replicates the working conditions and journalistic experience of a digital newsroom. Students are expected to work in editorial teams to create current and update multimedia content throughout the term.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a JOUR 525 number may not take this course for credit.
JOUR 531 Visual Journalism Photo Editing (3 credits)
This advanced workshop course covers the decision-making process for news, magazine and online photography, treating photo editing as a collaborative element of visual journalism. Moving beyond aesthetic and technical aspects, it situates editing within the larger context of news production, such as collaborating with reporters, editors and photo editors in the story-telling process.
JOUR 532 Documentary Video and Radio (3 credits)
This workshop allows students to perfect their skills in long format public affairs broadcasting in sound and pictures. Students learn the fundamentals of documentary production including story developments and treatment,cinematographic style, interviewing, editing and presentation.
JOUR 535 Documentary and Photographic Series (3 credits)
This advanced workshop course concentrates on the photo story, the editorial essay and the documentary essay. The course emphasizes pre-visualization, planning, logistics and realization as well as optimizing series for newspaper, magazine and online publications.
JOUR 536 Advanced Video Journalism (3 credits)
This course gives students the opportunity to perfect their skills in writing and reporting for video journalism and producing news and public affairs programming.
JOUR 537 Visual Journalism Portfolio (3 credits)
This advanced capstone workshop focuses on students creating professional portfolios, helping them create and establish their individual brands as professional visual journalists.
MAST 830 Cyclotomic Fields (3 credits)
L-series, Dirichlet theorem, Gauss sums, Stickelberger theorem, class groups and class number, circular units, analytic formulae.
MAST 831 Class Field Theory (3 credits)
Local and global class field theory, ideles and adeles, reciprocity laws, existence theorem.
MAST 832 Elliptic Curves (3 credits)
Introduction to elliptic curves over finite fields, local and global fields, rational points, Mordell-Weil theorem, formal groups.
MAST 833 Selected Topics in Number Theory (3 credits)
MAST 834 Selected Topics in Computational Algebra (3 credits)
Analysis
MAST 837 Selected Topics in Analysis (3 credits)
MAST 838 Selected Topics in Pure Mathematics (3 credits)
Mathematical Physics and Differential Geometry
MAST 840 Lie Groups (3 credits)
The mathematical theory of Lie groups and introduction to their representation theory with applications to mathematical physics. Topics will include classical Lie groups, one-parameter subgroups, Lie algebras and the exponential mapping, adjoint and coadjoint representations, roots and weights, the Killing form, semi-direct products, Haar measure and decompositions such as those of Cartan and Iwasawa. The theory of unitary representations on Hilbert spaces. Physical applications of compact Lie groups (such as SU(2) and SU(3)) and non-compact groups (such as the Lorentz and Poincaré groups).
MAST 841 Partial Differential Equations (P.D.E.’s) (3 credits)
Introduction to the mathematical theory of P.D.E.’s, including applications to mathematical physics. Topics will include Sturm-Liouville systems, boundary value and eigenvalue problems, Green’s functions for time-independent and time-dependent equations, Laplace and Fourier transform methods. Additional topics will be selected from the theory of elliptic equations (e.g. Laplace and Poisson equations), hyperbolic equations (e.g., the Cauchy problem for the wave equation) and parabolic equations (e.g., the Cauchy problem for the heat equation). Links will be made with the theory of differential operators and with analysis on manifolds.
MAST 851 Differential Geometric Methods in Physics (3 credits)
Manifolds, differential systems, Riemannian, Kahlerian and symplectic geometry, bundles, supermanifolds with applications to relativity, quantization, gauge field theory and Hamiltonian systems.
MAST 852 Algebro-Geometric Methods in Physics (3 credits)
Algebraic curves, Jacobi varieties, theta functions, moduli spaces of holomorphic bundles and algebraic curves, rational maps, sheaves and cohomology with applications to gauge theory, relativity and integrable systems.
MAST 853 Gauge Theory and Relativity (3 credits)
Yang-Mills theory, connections of fibre bundles, spinors, twistors, classical solutions, invariance groups, instantons, monopoles, topological invariants, Einstein equations, equations of motion, Kaluza-Klein, cosmological models, gravitational singularities.
MAST 854 Quantization Methods (3 credits)
Geometric quantization, Borel quantization, Mackey quantization, stochastic and phase space quantization, the problems of prequantization and polarization, deformation theory, dequantization.
MAST 855 Spectral Geometry (3 credits)
Schrödinger operators; min-max characterization of eigenvalues, geometry of the spectrum in parameter space, kinetic potentials, spectral approximation theory, linear combinations and smooth transformations of potentials, applications to the N-body problem.
MAST 856 Selected Topics in Mathematical Physics (3 credits)
MAST 857 Selected Topics in Differential Geometry (3 credits)
Dynamical Systems
MAST 860 Differentiable Dynamical Systems (3 credits)
The study of dynamical properties of diffeomorphisms or of one-parameter groups of diffeomorphisms (flows) defined on differentiable manifolds. Periodic points, the non-wandering set, and more general invariant sets. Smale’s horseshoe, Anosov, and Morse-Smale systems, general hyperbolic systems, the stable manifold theorem, various forms of stability, Markov partitions and symbolic dynamics.
MAST 861 Absolutely Continuous Invariant Measures (3 credits)
Review of functional analysis, Frobenius-Perron operator and its properties, existence of absolutely continuous invariant measures for piecewise expanding transformations, properties of invariant densities, compactness of invariant densities, spectral decomposition of the Frobenius-Perron operator, bounds on the number of absolutely continuous invariant measures, perturbations of absolutely continuous invariant measures.
MAST 862 Numerical Analysis of Nonlinear Problems (3 credits)
Continuation of solutions, homotopy methods, asymptotic stability, bifurcations, branch switching, limit points and higher order singularities, Hopf bifurcation, control of nonlinear phenomena, ODE with boundary and integral constraints, discretization, numerical stability and multiplicity, periodic solutions, Floquet multipliers, period doubling, tori, control of Hopf bifurcation and periodic solutions, travelling waves, rotations, bifurcation phenomena in partial differential equations, degenerate systems.
MAST 863 Bifurcation Theory of Vector Fields (3 credits)
Local and global bifurcations. Generalized Hopf bifurcation and generalized homoclinic bifurcation. Hamiltonian systems and systems close to Hamiltonian systems, local codimension two bifurcations of flows.
MAST 865 Selected Topics in Dynamical Systems (3 credits)
Statistics and Actuarial Mathematics
MAST 871 Advanced Probability Theory (3 credits)
Definition of probability spaces, review of convergence concepts, conditioning and the Markov property, introduction to stochastic processes and martingales.
MAST 872 Stochastic Processes (3 credits)
Stochastic sequences, martingales and semi-martingales, Gaussian processes, processes with independent increments, Markov processes, limit theorems for stochastic processes.
MAST 873 Advanced Statistical Inference (3 credits)
Decision functions, randomization, optimal decision rules, the form of Bayes’ rule for estimation problems, admissibility and completeness, minimax, rules, invariant statistical decisions, admissible and minimax decision rules, uniformly most powerful tests, unbiased tests, locally best tests, general linear hypothesis, multiple decision problems.
MAST 874 Advanced Multivariate Inference (3 credits)
Wishart distribution, analysis of dispersion , tests of linear hypotheses, Rao’s test for additional information, test for dimensionality, principal component analysis, discriminant analysis, Mahalanobis distance, cluster analysis, relations with sets of variates.
MAST 875 Advanced Sampling (3 credits)
Unequal probability sampling, multistage sampling, super population models, Bayes and empirical Bayes estimation, estimation of variance from complex surveys, non-response errors and multivariate auxiliary information.
MAST 876 Survival Analysis (3 credits)
Failure time models, inference in parametric models, proportional hazards, non-parametric inference, multivariate failure time data, competing risks.
MAST 877 Reliability Theory (3 credits)
Reliability performance measures, unrepairable systems, repairable systems, load-strength reliability models, distributions with monotone failure rates, analysis of performance effectiveness, optimal redundancy, heuristic methods in reliability.
MAST 878 Advanced Risk Theory (3 credits)
Generalizations of the classical risk model, renewal processes, Cox processes, diffusion models, ruin theory and optimal surplus control.
MAST 881 Selected Topics in Probability, Statistics and Actuarial Mathematics (3 credits)
Seminars
MAST 858 Seminar in Mathematical Physics (3 credits)
MAST 859 Seminar in Differential Geometry (3 credits)
MAST 868 Seminar in Dynamical Systems (3 credits)
MAST 889 Seminar in Probability, Statistics and Actuarial Mathematics (3 credits)
MAST 898 Seminar in Number Theory (3 credits)
MAST 899 Seminar in Computational Algebra (3 credits)
Thesis and Comprehensive Examinations
MAST 890 Comprehensive Examination A (6 credits)
MAST 891 Comprehensive Examination B (6 credits)
MAST 892 Doctoral Thesis (60 credits)
MAST 651 The Contributions of Mathematics to Intellectual Life (3 credits)
This course examines several major mathematical advances over the centuries in the historical and intellectual contexts of the day and also focuses on the developments of a particular branch of mathematics over the more recent past. Examples may include recent advances in number theory and geometry leading to a proof of Fermat’s Last Theorem and applications of number theory to cryptography.
MAST 652 Topics in Research in Mathematics Education (3 credits)
The general aim of this course is to acquaint students with research problems in mathematics education and ways of approaching them (theoretical frameworks and research methodologies).
Note: The content varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course provided the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated by the title of the course.
MAST 653 Topics in the Foundations of Mathematics (3 credits)
This course focuses on foundational issues and developments in mathematics, with topics chosen from particular branches of mathematics, e.g., geometry (Euclidean and non-Euclidean geometries; comparison of Euclid’s “Elements” with Hilbert’s “Grundlagen der Geometrie”, etc.), or logic (evolution of logic from Aristotle to Boole; Hilbert’s program; Gödel’s Incompleteness theorems, etc.). It may also look at foundational problems in mathematics suggested by physics and other sciences. More general, philosophical, epistemological and methodological questions about the nature of mathematics may also be chosen as topics for the course.
Note: The content varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course provided the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated by the title of the course.
MAST 654 Topics in the History of Mathematics (3 credits)
This course may focus on a particular epoch and place in the history of mathematics (e.g., Ancient Greek, Indian and Chinese mathematics; the development of mathematics in Europe in the 17th to 19th centuries, etc.), or on the history of a particular area of mathematics (history of geometry, algebra, analysis, number theory, etc.). Aspects related to the history of approaches to teaching mathematics may also be addressed.
Note: The content varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course provided the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated bythe title of the course.
Topology and Geometry
MAST 655 Topology (3 credits)
Topological spaces. Order, product, subspace, quotient topologies. Continuous functions. Compactness and connectedness. The fundamental group and covering spaces.
MAST 656 Differential Geometry (3 credits)
Mappings, functions and vectors fields on Rn, inverse and implicit function theorem, differentiable manifolds, immersions, submanifolds, Lie groups, transformation groups, tangent and cotangent bundles, vector fields, flows, Lie derivatives, Frobenius’ theorem, tensors, tensor fields, differential forms, exterior differential calculus, partitions of unity, integration on manifolds, Stokes’ theorem, Poincaré lemma, introduction to symplectic geometry and Hamiltonian systems.
MAST 657 Manifolds (3 credits)
MAST 658 Lie Groups (3 credits)
Analysis
MAST 661 Topics in Analysis (3 credits)
MAST 662 Functional Analysis I (3 credits)
This course will be an introduction to the theory of Hilbert spaces and the spectral analysis of self-adjoint and normal operators on Hilbert spaces. Applications could include Stone’s theorem on one parameter groups and/or reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces.
MAST 663 Introduction to Ergodic Theory (3 credits)
This course covers the following topics: measurable transformations, functional analysis review, the Birkhoff Ergodic Theorem, the Mean Ergodic Theorem, recurrence, ergodicity, mixing, examples, entrophy, invariant measures and existence of invariant measures.
MAST 664 Dynamical Systems (3 credits)
An introduction to the range of dynamical behaviour exhibited by one-dimensional dynamical systems. Recurrence, hyperbolicity, chaotic behaviour, topological conjugacy, structural stability, and bifurcation theory for one-parameter families of transformation. The study of unimodal functions on the interval such as the family Fr (X) = rx (1-x), where 0 ≤ r ≤ 4 . For general continuous maps of the interval, the structure of the set of periodic orbits, for example, is found in the theorem of Sarkovskii.
MAST 665 Complex Analysis (3 credits)
Review of Cauchy-Riemann equations, holomorphic and meromorphic functions, Cauchy integral theorem, calculus of residues, Laurent series, elementary multiple-valued functions, periodic meromorphic functions, elliptic functions of Jacobi and Wierstrass, elliptic integrals, theta functions. Riemann surfaces, uniformization, algebraic curves, abelian integrals, the Abel map, Riemann theta functions, Abel’s theorem, Jacobi varieties, Jacobi inversion problem. Applications to differential equations.
MAST 666 Differential Equations (3 credits)
MAST 667 Reading Course in Analysis (3 credits)
MAST 668 Transform Calculus (3 credits)
MAST 669 Measure Theory (3 credits)
Measure and integration, measure spaces, convergence theorems, Radon-Nikodem theorem, measure and outer measure, extension theorem, product measures, Hausdorf measure, Lp-spaces, Riesz theorem, bounded linear functionals on C(X), conditional expectations and martingales.
Statistics and Actuarial Mathematics
MAST 670 Mathematical Methods in Statistics (3 credits)
This course will discuss mathematical topics which may be used concurrently or subsequently in other statistics stream courses. The topics will come mainly from the following broad categories; 1) geometry of Euclidean space; 2) matrix theory and distribution of quadratic forms; 3) measure theory applications (Reimann-Stieltjes integrals); 4) complex variables (characteristic functions and inversion); 5) inequalities (Cauchy-Schwarz, Holder, Minkowski, etc.) and numerical techniques (Newton-Raphson algorithm, scoring method, statistical differentials); 6) some topics from probability theory.
MAST 671 Probability Theory (3 credits)
Axiomatic construction of probability; characteristic and generating functions; probabilistic models in reliability theory; laws of large numbers; infinitely divisible distributions; the asymptotic theory of extreme order statistics.
MAST 672 Statistical Inference I (3 credits)
Order statistics; estimation theory; properties of estimators; maximum likelihood method; Bayes estimation; sufficiency and completeness; interval estimation; shortest length confidence interval; Bayesian intervals; sequential estimation.
MAST 673 Statistical Inference II (3 credits)
Testing of hypotheses; Neyman-Pearson theory; optimal tests; linear hypotheses; invariance; sequential analysis.
MAST 674 Multivariate Analysis (3 credits)
An introduction to multivariate distributions will be provided; multivariate normal distribution and its properties will be investigated. Estimation and testing problems related with multivariate normal populations will be discussed with emphasis on Hotelling’s generalized T2 and Wishart distribution. Other multivariate techniques including MANOVA; canonical correlations and principal components may also be introduced.
MAST 675 Sample Surveys (3 credits)
A review of statistical techniques and simple random sampling, varying probability sampling, stratified sampling, cluster and systematic sampling-ratio and product estimators.
MAST 676 Linear Models (3 credits)
Matrix approach to development and prediction in linear models will be used. Statistical inferences on the parameters will be discussed after development of proper distribution theory. The concept of generalized inverse will be fully developed and analysis of variance models with fixed and mixed effects will be analyzed.
MAST 677 Time Series (3 credits)
Statistical analysis of time series in the time domain. Moving average and exponential smoothing methods to forecast seasonal and non-seasonal time series, construction of prediction intervals for future observations, Box-Jenkins ARIMA models and their applications to forecasting seasonal and non-seasonal time series. A substantial portion of the course will involve computer analysis of time series using computer packages (mainly MINITAB). No prior computer knowledge is required.
MAST 678 Statistical Consulting and Data Analysis (3 credits)
MAST 679 Topics in Statistics and Probability (3 credits)
MAST 720 Survival Analysis (3 credits)
Parametric and non-parametric failure time models; proportional hazards; competing risks.
MAST 721 Advanced Actuarial Mathematics (3 credits)
General risk contingencies; advanced multiple life theory; population theory; funding methods and dynamic control.
MAST 722 Advanced Pension Mathematics (3 credits)
Valuation methods, gains and losses, stochastic returns, dynamic control.
MAST 723 Portfolio Theory (3 credits)
Asset and liability management models, optimal portfolio selection, stochastic returns, special topics.
MAST 724 Risk Theory (3 credits)
General risk models; renewal processes; Cox processes; surplus control.
MAST 725 Credibility Theory (3 credits)
Classical, regression and hierarchical Bayes models, empirical credibility, robust credibility, special topics.
MAST 726 Loss Distributions (3 credits)
Heavy tailed distributions, grouped/censured data, point and interval estimation, goodness-of-fit, model selection.
MAST 727 Risk Classification (3 credits)
Cluster analysis, principal components, discriminant analysis, Mahalanobis distance, special topics.
MAST 728 Reading Course in Actuarial Mathematics (3 credits)
MAST 729 Selected Topics in Actuarial Mathematics (3 credits)
Applied Mathematics
MAST 680 Topics in Applied Mathematics (3 credits)
MAST 681 Optimization (3 credits)
Introduction to nonsmooth analysis: generalized directional derivative, generalized gradient, nonsmooth calculus; connections with convex analysis. Mathematical programming: optimality conditions; generalized multiplier approach to constraint qualifications and sensitivity analysis. Application of the theory: functions defined as pointwise maxima of a family of functions; minimizing the maximal eigenvalue of a matrix-valued function; variational analysis of an extended eigenvalue problem.
MAST 682 Matrix Analysis (3 credits)
Jordan canonical form and applications, Perron-Frobenius theory of nonnegative matrices with applications to economics and biology, generalizations to matrices which leave a cone invariant.
MAST 683 Numerical Analysis (3 credits)
This course consists of fundamental topics in numerical analysis with a bias towards analytical problems involving optimization integration, differential equations and Fourier transforms. The computer language C++ will be introduced and studied as part of this course; the use of “functional programming” and graphical techniques will be strongly encouraged. By the end of the course, students should have made a good start on the construction of a personal library of tools for exploring and solving mathematical problems numerically.
MAST 684 Quantum Mechanics (3 credits)
The aim of this course is two-fold: (i) to provide an elementary account of the theory of non-relativistic bound systems, and (ii) to give an introduction to some current research in this area, including spectral geometry.
MAST 685 Approximation Theory (3 credits)
MAST 686 Reading Course in Applied Mathematics (3 credits)
MAST 687 Control Theory (3 credits)
Linear algebraic background material, linear differential and control systems, controllability and observability, properties of the attainable set, the maximal principle and time-optimal control.
MAST 688 Stability Theory (3 credits)
MAST 689 Variational Methods (3 credits)
Algebra and Logic
MAST 691 Mathematical Logic (3 credits)
MAST 692 Advanced Algebra I (3 credits)
Field extensions, normality and separability, normal closures, the Galois correspondence, solution of equations by radicals, application of Galois theory, the fundamental theorem of algebra.
MAST 693 Algebraic Number Theory (3 credits)
Dedekind domains; ideal class groups; ramification; discriminant and different; Dirichlet unit theorem; decomposition of primes; local fields; cyclotomic fields.
MAST 694 Group Theory (3 credits)
Introduction to group theory, including the following topics: continuous and locally compact groups, subgroups and associated homogeneous spaces. Haar measures, quasi-invariant measures, group extensions and universal covering groups, unitary representations, Euclidean and Poincaré groups, square integrability of group representations with applications to image processing.
MAST 696 Advanced Algebra II (3 credits)
MAST 697 Reading Course in Algebra (3 credits)
MAST 698 Category Theory (3 credits)
MAST 699 Topics in Algebra (3 credits)
Thesis and Mathematical Literature
MAST 700 Thesis (27 credits)
MAST 701 Project (15 credits)
A student investigates a mathematical topic, prepares a report and gives a seminar presentation under the guidance of a faculty member.
MATH 603 Extended Project (9 credits)
A student investigates a mathematics education topic, prepares a report, and gives a seminar presentation under the guidance of a faculty member.
MATH 613 Topics in Number Theory
Topics are chosen from the area of Number Theory.
Note: The content varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated bythe title of the course.
MATH 616 Linear Algebra
This course is an extension of undergraduate courses in linear algebra, covering a selection of topics in advanced linear algebra (e.g. from the theory of general vector spaces, linear and multilinear algebras, matrix theory, etc.)
MATH 618 Topics in the Application of Mathematics
Topics are chosen from the area of the Application of Mathematics.
Note: The content varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated bythe title of the course.
MATH 621 Geometry
The course offers an insight into Euclidean and Non-Euclidean geometries.
MATH 622 Abstract Algebra
The course looks at objects such as numbers, polynomials, matrices or transformations from an algebraic-structural point of view. The course may aim at proving such “famous impossibilities” as squaring the circle, duplicating the cube, trisecting an angle or solving a polynomial equation of degree 5 or more by radicals.
MATH 624 Topics in Mathematics Education
This course is an overview and critical analysis of theories and technologies of mathematics teaching. Applications of the theories to studying and/or developing teaching situations or tools for specific mathematical topics are examined.
Note: The content varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated bythe title of the course.
MATH 625 Topology
The course develops elements of the theory of topological spaces and their transformations.
MATH 626 Analysis I
The course is an extension of undergraduate courses in mathematical analysis in the real domain (Analysis I, II; Real Analysis; Measure Theory). Students may substitute this course with any of the MAST 660-669 courses in the MA/MSc program.
MATH 627 Analysis II
The course is an extension of undergraduate courses in mathematical analysis in the complex domain (Complex Analysis I, II). Students may substitute this course with any of the MAST 660-669 courses in the MA/MSc program.
MATH 630 Topics in the Psychology of Mathematics Education
This course studies epistemological, cognitive, affective, social and cultural issues involved in mathematics.
Note: The content varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated bythe title of the course.
MATH 633 Applications of Technology in Mathematics Curriculum Development
This course is an overview of the impact of information and communication technology on curricula, textbooks and teaching approaches.
MATH 634 Computer Software and Mathematics Instruction
This course is an overview and critical evaluation of computer software designed for use in mathematics instruction.
MATH 637 Statistics and Probability
This course discusses theoretical and applied aspects of statistics and probability. Students may substitute this course with any of the MAST 670-677 courses in the MA/MSc program.
MATH 639 Topics in Technology in Mathematics Education
This course involves the elaboration, experimentation and critical analysis of individual projects of integration of ICT in mathematics education.
Note: The content varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated bythe title of the course.
MATH 640 Topics in Logic
Topics are chosen from the area of Mathematical Logic.
Note: The content varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated bythe title of the course.
MATH 641 Survey of Research in Mathematics Education
This course is an overview of recent results in mathematics education research.
MATH 642 Research Methods for Mathematics Education
This course is an overview of qualitative and quantitative methods in mathematics education research.
MATH 645 Topics in Mathematics Education Research
This course is an overview of research literature on a chosen topic or issue in mathematics education.
Note: The content varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated bythe title of the course.
MATH 646 Research Internship
Students conduct a pilot study or participate in a research project as a research assistant under the supervision of a senior researcher. The outcome is a written report of the study.
MATH 647 Readings in Mathematics Education II
The course is closely related to project or thesis writing. Its outcome is a section of the literature review chapter, focused on the student’s particular research question.
MATH 648 Topics in the History of Mathematics
Topics are chosen from the area of the History of Mathematics.
Note: The content varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated bythe title of the course.
MATH 649 Heuristics and Problem Solving
This course examines cognitive processes, tools and strategies involved in solving mathematical problems.
MATH 652 Seminar in Mathematics Education
This course is primarily a thesis or project preparation seminar but it is open to students in the Course Option as well. The research related to students’ research projects is presented and critically evaluated.
MATH 654 Thesis (15 credits)
Students are required to demonstrate their ability to carry out original, independent research. The thesis is researched and written under the direction of a supervisor and thesis committee. Upon completion of the thesis, the student is required to defend his/her thesis before the thesis committee.
PHIL 641 Philosophical Foundations of Biology (3 credits)
This course helps students critically engage biology’s philosophical foundations. Topics typically include the nature of scientific reasoning, testing, and evidence in biology; how best to discover, define, and apply biological concepts; and how to structure the aims of biology to fit our diverse and changing societies.
PHIL 643 Selected Topics in Metaphysics
Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course provided that the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. PHIL 643A, PHIL 643B, etc.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a PHIL 640 or PHIL 642 number may not take this course for credit.
PHIL 644 Philosophy of Science
This course provides an analysis of philosophical issues raised by science, such as those concerning scientific evidence, concepts, theories, and explanation; or the intersection with ethical and social problems.
Note: Students who have received credit for PHIL 650 or 657 may not take this course for credit.
PHIL 645 Philosophy of Mathematics
This course investigates some of the central issues and theories in the philosophy of mathematics such as logicism, intuitionism, or formalism. Other topics may include the nature of mathematical truth or the ontology and epistemology of mathematics.
PHIL 646 Philosophy of Language
Students analyse some aspects of the philosophy of language, such as the nature of meaning, the relation between language and thought, or the relation between language and the world.
Note: Students who have received credit for PHIL 651 may not take this course for credit.
PHIL 647 Philosophy of Mind
Students investigate central issues in the philosophy of mind, such as the architecture and modularity of the mind, the mind-body problem and mental causation, or the metaphysics and function of consciousness.
Note: Students who have received credit for PHIL 664 may not take this course for credit.
PHIL 648 Philosophy of Social Science
Students study methods of various social and human sciences and the differences in aims between, for instance, understanding, explaining, experiencing, and being liberated from oppression.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a PHIL 655 number may not take this course for credit.
PHIL 649 Phenomenology
Drawing from classical and recent phenomenlogical philosophy, students study selected central figures such as Husserl, Heidegger, and issues such as meaning, the body, temporality, and phenomenological reduction.
Note: Students who have received credit for PHIL 668 may not take this course for credit.
PHIL 652 Selected Topics in Logic
Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course provided that the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. PHIL 652A, PHIL 652B, etc.
Note: Students who have received credit for PHIL 611 may not take this course for credit.
PHIL 656 Selected Topics in Analytic Philosophy
Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course provided that the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. PHIL 656A, PHIL 656B, etc.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under PHIL 666 may not take this course for credit.
PHIL 658 Selected Topics in Continental Philosophy
Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course provided that the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. PHIL 658A, PHIL 658B, etc.
PHIL 659 Selected Topics in Metaphysics, Epistemology, or Philosophy of Science
Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course provided that the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. PHIL 659A, PHIL 659B, etc.
To be classified each year by the Graduate Program Director:
PHIL 672 Tutorial
PHIL 678 Topics in Current Research
PHIL 698 The Teaching of Philosophy
Research Paper and Thesis
PHIL 693 Research Paper (27 credits)
PHIL 696 Thesis (27 credits)
Cognate Courses
Students may enrol in certain courses in the Departments of Education, Political Science, and Religions and Cultures with permission of the Philosophy Graduate Program Director and the second department involved.
PHYS 861: Doctoral Seminar on Selected Topics I (3 credits), in which the candidates must present a pedagogical talk on a topic from physics to an advanced-level undergraduate student audience.
PHYS 862: Doctoral Seminar on Selected Topics II (3 credits), in which the candidates must present a talk related to their thesis research to a critical audience.
PHYS 870: Comprehensive Examination and Research Proposal (6 credits): The purpose of this course is to satisfy the department that the student is sufficiently prepared, in terms of background and ability, to pursue the research required for a PhD. Each student is required to prepare a written project in his/her field of research. The topic is general, and not part of the thesis work. The oral examination is based on the contents of this report. The Graduate Program Committee appoints an examination committee in consultation with the thesis supervisor. The supervisor is responsible for the subject chosen and also acts as a member of the examining committee for the oral presentation. The comprehensive examination must be completed within four months after the candidate's initial registration in the PhD program. The grade for this course is a Pass or Fail. In case of failure in the first attempt, only one more attempt is allowed to take place.
PHYS 890: Doctoral Research and Thesis (69 credits): A student who has passed the comprehensive examination is admitted to candidacy for the PhD degree. The student is allowed to continue working on a research project under the direction of a faculty member of the department only after passing the comprehensive examination. The research is in areas which reflect the interests of the faculty and the facilities of the department. The thesis must make a distinct and original contribution to knowledge, and be presented in acceptable literary form.
Academic Regulations
Academic Standing. Please refer to the Academic Standing section of the Calendar for a detailed review of the Academic Regulations.
Program Specific Requirements. Students must obtain an assessment grade point average (AGPA) of 3.00 based on a minimum of 6 credits.
Residence. The minimum period of residence is two years (6 terms) of full-time graduate study beyond the master’s degree, or the equivalent in part-time study, or three years (9 terms) of full-time graduate study beyond the bachelor’s degree for those students who are permitted to enrol for doctoral studies without completing a master’s degree.
Time Limit. Please refer to the Academic Regulation page for further details regarding the Time Limit requirements.
Graduation Requirement. In order to graduate, students must have a cumulative GPA of at least 3.00.
Courses
All courses are worth 3 credits each unless otherwise specified. The graduate courses offered by the Department of Physics fall into the following categories:
PHYS 600-609 Topics in Quantum and High Energy Physics
PHYS 630-639 Topics in Condensed Matter Physics
PHYS 640-649 Topics in Theoretical Physics
PHYS 660-669 Topics in Biomedical Physics
PHYS 670-679 Topics in Applied Physics
Topics in Quantum and High Energy Physics (600-609)
PHYS 601 Advanced Quantum Mechanics I (3 credits)
This course reviews the mathematical foundations of quantum mechanics, Heisenberg, Schroedinger, and interaction representations; time-dependent perturbation theory and the golden rule; collision theory, Born approximation, T-matrix and phase shifts; angular momentum theory: eigenvalues and eigenvectors, spherical harmonics, rotations and spin, additions theorems and their applications.
Note: Students who have received credit for PHYS 612 may not take this course for credit.
PHYS 602 Advanced Quantum Mechanics II (3 credits)
The following applications are examined: non-relativistic theory - systems of identical particles, second quantization, Hartree-Fock theory, as well as path integral formulation of quantum mechanics; relativistic theory: Dirac and Klein-Gordon equations, positron theory, propogator theory and their applications; field quantization, radiative effects, Dirac and Majorana spinors, Noether’s theorem.
Note: Students who have received credit for PHYS 613 may not take this course for credit.
PHYS 603 High Energy Physics (3 credits)
This course discusses symmetries and groups; antiparticles; electrodynamics of spinless particles, the Dirac equation and its implications for the electrodynamics of spin 1/2 particles. A general discussion of loops, renormalization and running coupling constants, hadronic structure and partons, is used to introduce the principles of Quantum Chromodynamics and Electroweak Interactions. The course concludes with an exposition of gauge symmetries, the Weinberg-Salam model, and Grand Unification.
Note: Students who have received credit for PHYS 616 may not take this course for credit.
PHYS 609 Selected Topics in Quantum or High Energy Physics (3 credits)
This course reflects the research interests of the physics faculty in quantum or high energy physics and/or those of the graduate students working with them.
Note: Students who have taken the same topic under PHYS 615, PHYS 618 or PHYS 619 may not take this course for credit.
Topics in Condensed Matter Physics (630-639)
PHYS 636 Condensed Matter Physics I (3 credits)
Review of electron levels in periodic potentials, various band-structure methods, Thomas-Fermi and Hartree-Fock theories, screening, anharmonic effects crystals, inhomogeneous semiconductors, p-n junctions, transistors. Dielectric properties of insulators, ferroelectric materials. Defects in crystals. Magnetic ordering, paramagnetism, diamagnetism, ferromagnetism, phase transitions, superconductivity.
PHYS 637 Condensed Matter Physics II (3 credits)
This course provides a review of the phonon modes and electron band structure of crystals. It covers a selection of modern quantum condensed‑matter topics which may include Hartree‑Fock, mesoscopic quantum transport theory (quantum dots, 1D systems, 2D systems), superconductivity, the quantum Hall effects, weak localization, and current research topics. Students further develop an in-depth knowledge of the course material through an individual project.
PHYS 639 Selected Topics in Condensed Matter Physics (3 credits)
This course reflects the research interests of the physics faculty in condensed matter physics and/or those of the graduate students working with them.
Note: Students who have received credit for PHYS 635 may not take this course for credit.
Topics in Theoretical Physics (640-649)
PHYS 642 Statistical Physics (3 credits)
This course covers statistical concepts, probability, Gaussian probability distribution, statistical ensemble, macrostates and microstates, thermodynamic probability, statistical thermodynamics, reversible and irreversible processes, entropy, thermodynamic laws and statistical relations, partition functions, Maxwell’s distribution, phase transformation, Maxwell-Boltzmann, Bose-Einstein and Fermi-Dirac statistics, quantum statistics in the classical limit, black-body radiation, conduction electrons in metals, interacting particle system, lattice vibrations, virial coefficients, Weiss molecular field approximation.
Note: Students who have received credit for PHYS 654 may not take this course for credit.
PHYS 644 Advanced Classical Mechanics and Relativity (3 credits)
This course covers generalized coordinates, Lagrange’s equations, method of Lagrange multipliers, variational formulation, Hamilton’s equations of motion, canonical transformations, Hamilton-Jacobi theory, special theory of relativity, Einstein’s axioms, Lorentz transformations, form invariance and tensors, four-vectors, gravity.
Note: Students who have received credit for PHYS 658 may not take this course for credit.
PHYS 646 Electrodynamics (3 credits)
This course covers the electrostatic boundary-value problem with Green’s function, Maxwell’s equations, energy-momentum tensor, guided waves, dielectric wave-guides, fibre optics, radiation static field, multipole radiation, velocity and acceleration field, Larmor’s formula, relativistic generalization, radiating systems, linear antenna, aperture in wave guide, scattering, Thompson scattering, Bremsstrahlung, Abraham-Lorentz equation, Breit-Wigner formula, Green’s function for Helmholtz’s equation. Noether’s theorem.
PHYS 648 Non Linear Waves (3 credits)
Linear stability analysis and limitations, modulated waves and nonlinear dispersion relations, Korteweg-de Vries, sine-Gordon, and nonlinear Schrödinger equations. Hydro-dynamic, transmission-line, mechanical, lattice, and optical solitions. Applications in optical fibres, Josephson junction arrays. Inverse scattering method, conservation laws.
PHYS 649 Selected Topics in Theoretical Physics (3 credits)
This course reflects the research interests of the Physics faculty in theoretical physics and/or those of the graduate students working with them.
Topics in Biomedical Physics (660-669)
PHYS 660 Chemical Aspects of Biophysics (3 credits)
This course examines several aspects of the stability of protein structures including bonding and nonbonding interactions, energy profiles, Ramachandran plot, stabilization through protonation-deprotonation, interaction of macromolecules with solvents, the thermodynamics of protein folding, and ligand binding. The Marcus-theory of biological electron transfer is discussed. The course also introduces the students to several modern biophysical techniques such as electronic spectroscopies (absorption, fluorescence), X-ray absorption spectroscopy, NMR and EPR spectroscopy, IR and Raman spectroscopy, circular dichroism, and differential scanning calorimetry. Students further develop an in-depth knowledge of the course material through an individual project.
PHYS 663 Quantitative Human Systems Physiology (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Open to all Science and Engineering program students.
This course addresses important concepts of quantitative systems physiology and the physical bases of physiological function in different organ systems. The student becomes familiar with the structure and functional principles of the main physiological systems, and how to quantify them. These include the nervous, cardiovascular, respiratory and muscular systems. Important biophysical principles and quantitative physiological methods are presented. Topics may include the biophysics of muscle contractions, fluid dynamics in the cardiovascular system, respiration gas exchange and neuronal communication, and how the biophysics of neuronal communications can be used to image brain activity. Students develop in-depth knowledge of how to apply these principles to a specific system through an individual project.
PHYS 665 Principles of Medical Imaging (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Open to all Science and Engineering program students.
This course aims to introduce the physical principles associated with important medical imaging techniques used in medicine and in neuroscience research. The objective is to cover the whole imaging process in detail starting from the body entities to be imaged (e.g. structure, function, blood flow, neuronal activity), to the physical principles of data acquisition and finally the methods used for image data reconstruction. Important imaging modalities such as X-ray and computer tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, nuclear medicine, ultrasound, electrophysiology and optical imaging techniques are presented. Students develop an in-depth understanding of how to apply this knowledge for a specific imaging modality through an individual project.
Topics in Applied Physics (670 - 679)
PHYS 679 Selected Topics in Applied Physics (3 credits)
This course reflects the research interests of the Physics faculty in Applied Physics and/or those of the graduate students working with them.
Seminar, Thesis, and Comprehensive Examination
PHYS 861 Doctoral Seminar on Selected Topics I (3 credits)
Students must present one pedagogical seminar on a topic from physics to an advanced-level undergraduate student audience. This course is evaluated on a pass/fail basis. No substitution is permitted.
PHYS 862 Doctoral Seminar on Selected Topics II (3 credits)
Students must present one seminar in their current research area to a critical audience. In addition, students are required to attend and participate in all departmental seminars. This course is evaluated on a pass/fail basis. No substitution is permitted.
PHYS 870 Comprehensive Examination and Research Proposal (6 credits)
PHYS 890 Doctoral Research and Thesis (69 credits)
Note: Students admitted prior to 1997-98 should register for PHYS 850 (70 credits). Students admitted after summer 1997 will register for PHYS 850 (66 credits).
PHYS 760: MSc Seminar on Selected Topics (3 credits). Students must give one seminar in the field of their research.
PHYS 790: Master’s Research and Thesis (33 credits): The thesis must represent the results of the student's original research work undertaken after admission to this program. Work previously published by the student may be used only as introductory or background subject matter. The thesis is examined by a departmental committee. An oral examination is conducted to test the candidate's ability to defend the thesis.
The thesis may be based on a study of a significant problem in physics or a research project conducted as part of the student’s employment. Permission to submit a thesis in the latter category is granted in the event that:
the student’s employer furnishes written approval for the pursuit and reporting of the project;
the student has research facilities which, in the opinion of the physics graduate studies committee, are adequate;
arrangements can be made for supervision of the project by a faculty member of the Department of Physics;
in all but exceptional cases, the student has direct supervision by a qualified supervisor at the site of the student’s employment. The supervisor must be approved by the physics graduate studies committee. A written working agreement between the supervisor and the university are required;
the proposed topic for the thesis, together with a brief statement outlining the proposed method of treatment, is approved by the physics graduate studies committee.
Academic Regulations
Academic Standing. Please refer to the Academic Standing section of the Calendar for a detailed review of the Academic Regulations.
Residence. The minimum residence requirement is one year (3 terms) of full-time study, or the equivalent in part-time study.
Time Limit. Please refer to the Academic Regulation page for further details regarding the Time Limit requirements.
Graduation Requirement. In order to graduate, students must have a cumulative GPA of at least 2.70.
Courses
All courses are worth 3 credits each unless otherwise specified. The graduate courses offered by the Department of Physics fall into the following categories:
PHYS 600-609 Topics in Quantum and High Energy Physics
PHYS 630-639 Topics in Condensed Matter Physics
PHYS 640-649 Topics in Theoretical Physics
PHYS 660-669 Topics in Biomedical Physics
PHYS 670-679 Topics in Applied Physics
Topics in Quantum and High Energy Physics (600-609)
PHYS 601 Advanced Quantum Mechanics I (3 credits)
This course reviews the mathematical foundations of quantum mechanics, Heisenberg, Schroedinger, and interaction representations; time-dependent perturbation theory and the golden rule; collision theory, Born approximation, T-matrix and phase shifts; angular momentum theory: eigenvalues and eigenvectors, spherical harmonics, rotations and spin, additions theorems and their applications.
Note: Students who have received credit for PHYS 612 may not take this course for credit.
PHYS 602 Advanced Quantum Mechanics II (3 credits)
The following applications are examined: non-relativistic theory - systems of identical particles, second quantization, Hartree-Fock theory, as well as path integral formulation of quantum mechanics; relativistic theory: Dirac and Klein-Gordon equations, positron theory, propogator theory and their applications; field quantization, radiative effects, Dirac and Majorana spinors, Noether’s theorem.
Note: Students who have received credit for PHYS 613 may not take this course for credit.
PHYS 603 High Energy Physics (3 credits)
This course discusses symmetries and groups; antiparticles; electrodynamics of spinless particles, the Dirac equation and its implications for the electrodynamics of spin 1/2 particles. A general discussion of loops, renormalization and running coupling constants, hadronic structure and partons, is used to introduce the principles of Quantum Chromodynamics and Electroweak Interactions. The course concludes with an exposition of gauge symmetries, the Weinberg-Salam model, and Grand Unification.
Note: Students who have received credit for PHYS 616 may not take this course for credit.
PHYS 609 Selected Topics in Quantum or High Energy Physics (3 credits)
This course reflects the research interests of the physics faculty in quantum or high energy physics and/or those of the graduate students working with them.
Note: Students who have taken the same topic under PHYS 615, PHYS 618 or PHYS 619 may not take this course for credit.
Topics in Condensed Matter Physics (630-639)
PHYS 636 Condensed Matter Physics I (3 credits)
Review of electron levels in periodic potentials, various band-structure methods, Thomas-Fermi and Hartree-Fock theories, screening, anharmonic effects crystals, inhomogeneous semiconductors, p-n junctions, transistors. Dielectric properties of insulators, ferroelectric materials. Defects in crystals. Magnetic ordering, paramagnetism, diamagnetism, ferromagnetism, phase transitions, superconductivity.
PHYS 637 Condensed Matter Physics II (3 credits)
This course provides a review of the phonon modes and electron band structure of crystals. It covers a selection of modern quantum condensed‑matter topics which may include Hartree‑Fock, mesoscopic quantum transport theory (quantum dots, 1D systems, 2D systems), superconductivity, the quantum Hall effects, weak localization, and current research topics. Students further develop an in-depth knowledge of the course material through an individual project.
PHYS 639 Selected Topics in Condensed Matter Physics (3 credits)
This course reflects the research interests of the physics faculty in condensed matter physics and/or those of the graduate students working with them.
Note: Students who have received credit for PHYS 635 may not take this course for credit.
Topics in Theoretical Physics (640-649)
PHYS 642 Statistical Physics (3 credits)
This course covers statistical concepts, probability, Gaussian probability distribution, statistical ensemble, macrostates and microstates, thermodynamic probability, statistical thermodynamics, reversible and irreversible processes, entropy, thermodynamic laws and statistical relations, partition functions, Maxwell’s distribution, phase transformation, Maxwell-Boltzmann, Bose-Einstein and Fermi-Dirac statistics, quantum statistics in the classical limit, black-body radiation, conduction electrons in metals, interacting particle system, lattice vibrations, virial coefficients, Weiss molecular field approximation.
Note: Students who have received credit for PHYS 654 may not take this course for credit.
PHYS 644 Advanced Classical Mechanics and Relativity (3 credits)
This course covers generalized coordinates, Lagrange’s equations, method of Lagrange multipliers, variational formulation, Hamilton’s equations of motion, canonical transformations, Hamilton-Jacobi theory, special theory of relativity, Einstein’s axioms, Lorentz transformations, form invariance and tensors, four-vectors, gravity.
Note: Students who have received credit for PHYS 658 may not take this course for credit.
PHYS 646 Electrodynamics (3 credits)
This course covers the electrostatic boundary-value problem with Green’s function, Maxwell’s equations, energy-momentum tensor, guided waves, dielectric wave-guides, fibre optics, radiation static field, multipole radiation, velocity and acceleration field, Larmor’s formula, relativistic generalization, radiating systems, linear antenna, aperture in wave guide, scattering, Thompson scattering, Bremsstrahlung, Abraham-Lorentz equation, Breit-Wigner formula, Green’s function for Helmholtz’s equation. Noether’s theorem.
PHYS 648 Non Linear Waves (3 credits)
Linear stability analysis and limitations, modulated waves and nonlinear dispersion relations, Korteweg-de Vries, sine-Gordon, and nonlinear Schrödinger equations. Hydro-dynamic, transmission-line, mechanical, lattice, and optical solitions. Applications in optical fibres, Josephson junction arrays. Inverse scattering method, conservation laws.
PHYS 649 Selected Topics in Theoretical Physics (3 credits)
This course reflects the research interests of the Physics faculty in theoretical physics and/or those of the graduate students working with them.
Topics in Biomedical Physics (660-669)
PHYS 660 Chemical Aspects of Biophysics (3 credits)
This course examines several aspects of the stability of protein structures including bonding and nonbonding interactions, energy profiles, Ramachandran plot, stabilization through protonation-deprotonation, interaction of macromolecules with solvents, the thermodynamics of protein folding, and ligand binding. The Marcus-theory of biological electron transfer is discussed. The course also introduces the students to several modern biophysical techniques such as electronic spectroscopies (absorption, fluorescence), X-ray absorption spectroscopy, NMR and EPR spectroscopy, IR and Raman spectroscopy, circular dichroism, and differential scanning calorimetry. Students further develop an in-depth knowledge of the course material through an individual project.
PHYS 663 Quantitative Human Systems Physiology (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Open to all Science and Engineering program students.
This course addresses important concepts of quantitative systems physiology and the physical bases of physiological function in different organ systems. The student becomes familiar with the structure and functional principles of the main physiological systems, and how to quantify them. These include the nervous, cardiovascular, respiratory and muscular systems. Important biophysical principles and quantitative physiological methods are presented. Topics may include the biophysics of muscle contractions, fluid dynamics in the cardiovascular system, respiration gas exchange and neuronal communication, and how the biophysics of neuronal communications can be used to image brain activity. Students develop in-depth knowledge of how to apply these principles to a specific system through an individual project.
PHYS 665 Principles of Medical Imaging (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Open to all Science and Engineering program students.
This course aims to introduce the physical principles associated with important medical imaging techniques used in medicine and in neuroscience research. The objective is to cover the whole imaging process in detail starting from the body entities to be imaged (e.g. structure, function, blood flow, neuronal activity), to the physical principles of data acquisition and finally the methods used for image data reconstruction. Important imaging modalities such as X-ray and computer tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, nuclear medicine, ultrasound, electrophysiology and optical imaging techniques are presented. Students develop an in-depth understanding of how to apply this knowledge for a specific imaging modality through an individual project.
Topics in Applied Physics (670 - 679)
PHYS 679 Selected Topics in Applied Physics (3 credits)
This course reflects the research interests of the Physics faculty in Applied Physics and/or those of the graduate students working with them.
Seminar, Thesis, and Comprehensive Examination
PHYS 760 MSc Seminar on Selected Topics (3 credits)
Students must give one seminar in the field of their research. In addition, full time students must participate in all seminars given in the department, and part time students must attend, during their studies, the same number of seminars that are normally given during the minimum residence requirement for full time students. The course in evaluated on a pass/fail basis. No substitution is permitted.
PHYS 790 Master’s Research and Thesis (33 credits)
POLI 801 Advanced Seminar in Comparative Politics (3 credits)
This course is a survey of the field of comparative politics at an advanced level. It examines major theories, concepts and methods of comparative political analysis.
POLI 802 Advanced Seminar in International Politics (3 credits)
This course is a survey of core concepts of international politics at an advanced level. It examines major theoretical perspectives and their application to historical and contemporary international issues.
POLI 803 Advanced Seminar in Canadian and Québec Politics (3 credits)
This course is a survey of the field at an advanced level. It presents a discussion of contemporary issues and controversies in Canadian and Québec politics.
POLI 804 Advanced Seminar in Political Theory (3 credits)
This course is a survey of leading research in political theory and political philosophy, including the history of political thought, normative political theory and contemporary political thought.
POLI 805 Advanced Seminar in Public Policy and Public Administration (3 credits)
This course surveys several theoretical models and paradigms of public policy and public administration. It examines critically the intellectual and ideological traditions of policy analysis.
POLI 844 Research Design (3 credits)
This course explores differing research philosophies, the principles of research design and research strategies. It also considers philosophical critiques of different approaches and practical aspects of conducting research.
Elective Courses
POLI 811 Special Topics in Comparative Politics (3 credits)
Topics vary from year to year.
POLI 812 Special Topics in International Politics (3 credits)
Topics vary from year to year.
POLI 813 Special Topics in Canadian and Québec Politics (3 credits)
Topics vary from year to year.
POLI 814 Special Topics in Political Theory (3 credits)
Topics vary from year to year.
POLI 815 Special Topics in Public Policy and Public Administration (3 credits)
Topics vary from year to year.
POLI 898 Directed Studies (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the PhD Committee.
This special reading course is designed to explore topics and themes relevant to a student’s doctoral research.
Comprehensive Exams
POLI 885 Comprehensive Exam (6 credits)
POLI 886 Comprehensive Exam (6 credits)
Thesis
POLI 889 Thesis Proposal (3 credits)
POLI 890 Thesis (54 credits)
POLI 694 Thesis Proposal (3 credits)
POLI 696 Master’s Thesis (24 credits)
Course Descriptions
All courses listed are one-term, 3-credit courses unless otherwise indicated. Some courses are offered in French.
Political Science
POLI 600 Public Policy and the Governmental Process in Canada
The course is designed to familiarize students with the structures and processes of policy-making in Canadian government. Particular attention is given to theories of public policy, the role of key institutions and agencies in the formulation and analysis of policy, and recent organizational developments in the executive-bureaucratic arena.
POLI 601 Research Design
This course explores differing research philosophies, the principles of research design and research strategies. It also considers philosophical critiques of different approaches and practical aspects of conducting research.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 685 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 603 International Relations Theory
This course explores the major theories, approaches and contemporary debates within international relations theory. Topics include the development of realism, liberalism, constructivism and critical approaches. Major aspects of international relations theory, such as security, political economy, and international organization, are also explored.
POLI 604 Comparative Public Policy
This course analyses policy development in industrialized countries. It focuses on various areas such as economic, education, fiscal and social policies. Moreover, this course examines contributions that address methodological issues related to comparative research.
POLI 605 Environmental Policy and Governance
Students in this seminar course conduct a theoretical and empirical survey of contemporary approaches to environmental policy development and implementation at various levels of governance, including municipal, national and international. Case studies may include toxic waste, oceans management, the impact of trade agreements, biodiversity conservation, and climate change.
POLI 606 Policy Making and the National Purpose in Canada
This course focuses upon the American challenge to Canadian independence in the economic, cultural, defence and other spheres, and examines policy initiatives taken by Canadian governments and the various proposals advanced by nationalist groups to meet this challenge.
POLI 607 Ageing and Public Policy
Substantial improvement in health, hygiene and working conditions combined with declining fertility rate is creating an important demographic shift. As a result, the number of individuals aged 65 and above is expected to double by 2031. This has multiple policy and political consequences across industrialized countries. The object of this course is to analyze this demographic shift from a comparative perspective.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 681 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 608 Globalization and Regional Integration
A study of the long range historical tendencies towards large and complex interdependent organizations in the post industrial world. These trends juxtapose the regional confederation of the European community as well as the rising trade blocs of North America and the Pacific, with the development of a single political economic and cultural super-system of global scope.
POLI 610 Economic Policy After Keynes
This course introduces students to the controversy surrounding the economics of Keynes and the implications of his work for the current problems of unemployment and growth. Interpretations of Keynes are explored in the context of the current eclipse of Keynesianism in public policy circles.
POLI 611 Judicial Politics and Policy
This course considers the increased policy-making functions of Supreme Courts in systems that have statutory and entrenched bills of rights. By focusing on the interaction between courts and legislatures, and the increasing use of litigation strategies by interest groups, the implications of public policy in a rights context are examined.
POLI 612 Public Policy and Business Cycles
This course explores the public policy of managing the business cycle. The emphasis is on both the theoretical literature associated with modern notions of managing the economic cycle and on applied case studies. The focus is both Canadian and comparative.
POLI 613 Political Socialization: A Comparative Perspective
The course presents an overview of the central concepts and theories used in political socialization research. Students learn about the major sources of political opinions, attitudes and values. This course also investigates how political socialization is used in practice in Canadian politics and within several other sub-disciplines of political science.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 683 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 614 Political Economy of Advanced Industrial Nations
The course provides an overview of the scholarly debate and research on political economy issues considered central to an examination of the political economy of advanced countries.
POLI 615 The Politics of Citizenship in Canada
This course examines key debates in the study and practice of citizenship in Canada. It explores the different forces which are transforming our understanding of citizenship, including globalization, nationalism, welfare state reform, international migration, and multiculturalism. Topics include citizenship and social exclusion; social rights and the welfare state; and economic citizenship, employment and social identity.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under POLI 685J may not take this course for credit.
POLI 616 Theories of Foreign Policy
This course explores the major international and domestic determinants of foreign policy. Principal topics include the influence of the international system, geography, leadership, regime-type, transnationalism and non-governmental organizations on foreign policy. Rather than focusing on any particular country, the course draws upon the experiences of a variety of Western democratic states utilizing case studies of American, British, French and Canadian foreign policy to illustrate and evaluate course themes.
POLI 617 Knowledge in International Relations
This course examines the creation and use of expertise in policy-making, including questions of knowledge construction, the sway of science versus norms on decision-makers, and the impact of bureaucratic processes on the quality of policy. Alternative conceptions of knowledge and its effects on decision-making from political science, sociology, economics, and psychology are applied to issues including national security, environmental politics and economics.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 687 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 618 Canadian Public Administration
Discussion is directed towards an understanding of public administration in the Canadian federal setting. Some of the main problems of public administration are related to important changes which have taken place over the last twenty years and which are continuing to take place.
POLI 619 International Peacekeeping
This course is a seminar on the theory and practice of multinational peace and stability operations. The course covers theoretical perspectives on peace operations; the origins and evolution of peace operations, with particular focus on the expansion and transformation of peace operations since the end of the Cold War; the organizational and international politics of peace operations; causes of peace operations’ success and failure; problems of managing and coordinating actors involved in peace operations; and prospects for organizational learning and reform. The course examines specific cases of peacekeeping, peacebuilding and peace enforcement.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 687 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 621 Political Leadership and Decision Making
This course considers the ways political actors attempt policy and institutional changes through an examination of leadership skills and decision making styles. It considers the philosophical treatments by Plato and Machiavelli and the relationship between morality and leadership by analyzing modern leadership within a constrained constitutional context.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under POLI 687M may not take this course for credit.
POLI 622 Comparative Public Administration
A comparative study of the public administration systems in various western countries with emphasis on a comparison vis-à-vis the Canadian federal system.
POLI 623 Ethics, Morality and Justice
This course focuses on the essential political concepts of ethics, justice and morality which underlie and motivate almost all political activity. The course explores both ancient and contemporary perspectives on the meaning of these concepts and examines the problems and theoretical challenges that arise when a definitive notion of justice is used to assess or generate public policy.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 685 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 624 Public Administration of Intergovernmental Affairs
This course deals with intergovernmental affairs that have become a significant part of the policy process in many countries. An analysis of power relations in the federal state, both in institutional and societal terms, will be a primary focus of this course. The Canadian case will serve as the main area of inquiry.
POLI 625 Policy Discourse of Biotechnology
This course examines the philosophical, political, and theoretical counsel to policymakers and broader public discourse surrounding the development and implementation of new laws and regulations pertaining to issues in advanced biotechnology, such as cloning, stem cell research, and psychopharmacology.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 685 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 626 Seminar in Comparative Politics
This course is a survey of the field of comparative politics. It examines major theories, concepts and methods of comparative political analysis.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 681 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 628 Ethics and Values in Public Policy Making
This course provokes critical thinking on value judgements underlying policy-making and familiarizes students with practical measures available for promoting integrity in public institutions. Students examine the principles underlying ethical standards, various professional codes of ethics, issues such as potential conflicts between personal convictions and public duties, and the ethical responsibility of public officials and civil servants in democratic societies.
POLI 629 Critical Perspectives in Development
This course examines key debates surrounding the concept and the politics of development in the ‘less developed’ world with a particular emphasis on institutional structures, such as the state, the market and non-governmental organizations, through which development has been pursued.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under POLI 687K may not take this course for credit.
POLI 630 0rganization Theory
This is a seminar in organization theory, an interdisciplinary field concerned with the sources, determinants, functions, and effects of complex organizations. The course focuses on political organizations and the political effects of organizations by reviewing the historical development of organization theory and considering how current debates help us understand the nature and functions of organizations in the twenty-first century. Topics include the nature and sources of formal organizations; organizational structure; organizational decision-making; organizational culture; organizational reliability and failure; and the interaction between organizations and their environments.
POLI 631 Political Texts
The course is an intensive study of a text by a major author such as Plato, Machiavelli, Hobbes, or Nietzsche. Students systematically explore the issues and problems raised by the text and the interpretive traditions that follow from it.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 685 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 632 Seminar in Political Theory
This course is a survey of leading research in and approaches to political theory and political philosophy, including the history of political thought, normative political theory and contemporary political thought.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 685 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 634 Policy Analysis and Program Evaluation
This course focuses upon methods of assessing consequences of public policies. The main purpose of the course is to allow students to survey evaluation research in political science and to present research designs that will enable them to make plausible assumptions about the outcome of governmental programs in the absence of experimental control.
POLI 635 Biotechnology, Agriculture and Food Policy
The purpose of this course is to explore the ethical and policy dilemmas that rapid scientific and technological advances in biotechnology pose for issues of agriculture and food security. The course focuses on Canadian policy within a comparative perspective and examines alternative policy responses, such as found in the US, EU and developing countries.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 685 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 636 Theories of Public Policy and Public Administration
The course explores the diverse intellectual and ideological origins of Public Administration and Public Policy. The focus is on the comparative and critical analysis of the theoretical models under study. Students are encouraged to think analytically and to apply theoretical frameworks to their own empirical enquiries.
POLI 637 Democracy and Regime Change
This seminar examines the various definitions and understandings of democratic and authoritarian regimes and the principal moments of regime change (breakdown, transition, post-transition, and consolidation). It focuses on institution-building, the actors involved in the process of regime change and the political economy of transitions.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under POLI 687B may not take this course for credit.
POLI 638 Seminar in Canadian and Quebec Politics
This course is a survey of the field at an advanced level. It presents a discussion of contemporary issues and controversies in Canadian and Quebec Politics.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 683 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 643 Rational and Public Choice
This course deals with understanding the micro-analytical foundations of individual and group behaviour in political life. It introduces students to the main concepts, theorems and their applications in positive analytical politics including game theory, spatial modeling and institutional analysis.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under POLI 687C may not take this course for credit.
POLI 644 Research Methods
This course introduces students to the logic and methodology of Political Science research and public policy analysis.
POLI 645 Indigenous Peoples and the State
This course examines the political and administrative context in which Indigenous Peoples and the state coexist as well as the tensions between European and Indigenous modes of governance. It focuses on the evolution of institutions and policies regulating this relationship, and the governance strategies developed consistent with Indigenous traditions. The Canadian case serves as the focus but other countries may be considered.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under POLI 683M may not take this course for credit.
POLI 646 History of Thought in Political Economy
This course presents a survey of the major ideas which have shaped the various approaches to political economy from the classical theorists to twentieth century thinkers. The historical and contemporary influence of these ideas on public policy is evaluated.
POLI 647 International Human Security
An introduction to the growing literature and controversies surrounding the concept of ‘human security’ in international politics, applied specifically to the Canadian foreign policy context. Examined actors include states, non-governmental organizations, international institutions, and ‘civil society’.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under POLI 687O may not take this course for credit.
POLI 648 Feminist Critiques of Public Policy
This course provides an in-depth examination of feminist and critical perspectives of public policy and administration. The course seeks to examine the ways in which social location is implicated in (and mediated by) public policy theory and practice. Specific topics may include the state of bureaucracy, state-society relations, public policy discourses, structures, processes and outcomes, and substantive issue areas, such as body politics, social and economic policy, and the labour market.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 683 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 649 Gender and Global Politics
This seminar focuses on the intersection of the global and the local through different methodological and theoretical approaches to the study of gender. Drawing from texts from the fields of comparative politics, international relations and sociology, the course exposes class participants to different scholarly treatments of gender and politics especially as these treatments have evolved in a post-Cold War era of increasing globalization.
POLI 652 Science, Technology and Power
This course introduces students to the growing field of science policy analysis. It provides an overview of the theoretical approaches and analytical tools used in the area and critically discusses various policy mechanisms now in place as well as current and emerging issues.
POLI 654 Concepts of the State
This course examines several of the most significant attempts made by modern political thinkers to answer the question, “What is the modern state?” It addresses both the historical emergence of the modern state and the various ways that this emergence has been theorized. Special emphasis is placed on the differences and interconnections between historical, theoretical, and practical questions.
POLI 657 Nationalism and Ethnicity
This seminar discusses the nature, dynamics and consequences of nationalism. The emphasis is placed on presenting and discussing various theoretical understandings of identity and nationalist mobilization. It examines conceptual issues relating to the study of nationalism, namely the nature, origins and characterizations of nations and nationalism and the strategies for regulation of nationalist conflict.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under POLI 687H may not take this course for credit.
POLI 658 Authors of the Political Imagination
This course examines a broad range of literary and non-literary genres for their potential to inform and redirect the political imagination. The seminar adopts a broadly comparative perspective on literature, culture, politics and individual motivation.
POLI 659 International Organizations
This course explores the role of international organizations, institutions and regimes in world politics. The course covers intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations as well as informal institutional arrangements. It surveys theoretical debates regarding the origins, dynamics, and significance of international organizations, and examines their role in areas such as international security, international political economy, and regional integration. The course also considers debates over democratic accountability within international organizations and the efficacy of global governance.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 687 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 662 International Political Economy
This course covers theories from macroeconomics and international relations and their application to major historical and contemporary events in the evolution of the global political economy. Topics include international trade and finance, economic development,regional integration and globalization, North-South relations, the emergence of multinational corporations, and international organizations such as the World Bank, IMF, WTO, OECD, and UNCTAD.
POLI 681 Special Topics in Comparative Politics
POLI 683 Special Topics in Public Policy and Administration
POLI 684 Special Topics in Canadian and Quebec Politics
POLI 685 Special Topics in Political Theory
POLI 687 Special Topics in International Politics
POLI 694 Thesis Proposal (3 credits)
This course is a directed study involving a comprehensive understanding of the literature in the area of research directly relevant to the thesis topic under the direction of a faculty supervisor. The written assignments involve a comprehensive literature review, annotated bibliography and research design that culminate in a thesis proposal presented in an oral defence before the thesis supervisor and two faculty members in the graduate program.
POLI 695 Directed Studies
Independent study in the area of concentration.
POLI 696 Master’s Thesis (24 credits)
Students are required to demonstrate their ability to carry out original, independent research. The thesis, which is researched and written under the direction of a supervisor and thesis committee, is defended before the student’s thesis committee.
Cognate Courses
Students may enrol in cognate courses in the John Molson School of Business and in the Departments of Communication Studies, Economics, Education, and Sociology and Anthropology in the Faculty of Arts and Science. Permission of the Graduate Program Directors of both the Master of/Magisteriate in Arts (Public Policy and Public Administration) and the second department is required.
POLI 601 Research Design (3 credits)
POLI 691 Extended Research Essay (12 credits)
POLI 693 Internship with Research Paper (21 credits)
Course Descriptions
All courses listed are one-term, 3-credit courses unless otherwise indicated. Some courses are offered in French.
Political Science
POLI 600 Public Policy and the Governmental Process in Canada
The course is designed to familiarize students with the structures and processes of policy-making in Canadian government. Particular attention is given to theories of public policy, the role of key institutions and agencies in the formulation and analysis of policy, and recent organizational developments in the executive-bureaucratic arena.
POLI 601 Research Design
This course explores differing research philosophies, the principles of research design and research strategies. It also considers philosophical critiques of different approaches and practical aspects of conducting research.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 685 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 603 International Relations Theory
This course explores the major theories, approaches and contemporary debates within international relations theory. Topics include the development of realism, liberalism, constructivism and critical approaches. Major aspects of international relations theory, such as security, political economy, and international organization, are also explored.
POLI 604 Comparative Public Policy
This course analyses policy development in industrialized countries. It focuses on various areas such as economic, education, fiscal and social policies. Moreover, this course examines contributions that address methodological issues related to comparative research.
POLI 605 Environmental Policy and Governance
Students in this seminar course conduct a theoretical and empirical survey of contemporary approaches to environmental policy development and implementation at various levels of governance, including municipal, national and international. Case studies may include toxic waste, oceans management, the impact of trade agreements, biodiversity conservation, and climate change.
POLI 606 Policy Making and the National Purpose in Canada
This course focuses upon the American challenge to Canadian independence in the economic, cultural, defence and other spheres, and examines policy initiatives taken by Canadian governments and the various proposals advanced by nationalist groups to meet this challenge.
POLI 607 Ageing and Public Policy
Substantial improvement in health, hygiene and working conditions combined with declining fertility rate is creating an important demographic shift. As a result, the number of individuals aged 65 and above is expected to double by 2031. This has multiple policy and political consequences across industrialized countries. The object of this course is to analyze this demographic shift from a comparative perspective.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 681 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 608 Globalization and Regional Integration
A study of the long range historical tendencies towards large and complex interdependent organizations in the post industrial world. These trends juxtapose the regional confederation of the European community as well as the rising trade blocs of North America and the Pacific, with the development of a single political economic and cultural super-system of global scope.
POLI 610 Economic Policy After Keynes
This course introduces students to the controversy surrounding the economics of Keynes and the implications of his work for the current problems of unemployment and growth. Interpretations of Keynes are explored in the context of the current eclipse of Keynesianism in public policy circles.
POLI 611 Judicial Politics and Policy
This course considers the increased policy-making functions of Supreme Courts in systems that have statutory and entrenched bills of rights. By focusing on the interaction between courts and legislatures, and the increasing use of litigation strategies by interest groups, the implications of public policy in a rights context are examined.
POLI 612 Public Policy and Business Cycles
This course explores the public policy of managing the business cycle. The emphasis is on both the theoretical literature associated with modern notions of managing the economic cycle and on applied case studies. The focus is both Canadian and comparative.
POLI 613 Political Socialization: A Comparative Perspective
The course presents an overview of the central concepts and theories used in political socialization research. Students learn about the major sources of political opinions, attitudes and values. This course also investigates how political socialization is used in practice in Canadian politics and within several other sub-disciplines of political science.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 683 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 614 Political Economy of Advanced Industrial Nations
The course provides an overview of the scholarly debate and research on political economy issues considered central to an examination of the political economy of advanced countries.
POLI 615 The Politics of Citizenship in Canada
This course examines key debates in the study and practice of citizenship in Canada. It explores the different forces which are transforming our understanding of citizenship, including globalization, nationalism, welfare state reform, international migration, and multiculturalism. Topics include citizenship and social exclusion; social rights and the welfare state; and economic citizenship, employment and social identity.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under POLI 685J may not take this course for credit.
POLI 616 Theories of Foreign Policy
This course explores the major international and domestic determinants of foreign policy. Principal topics include the influence of the international system, geography, leadership, regime-type, transnationalism and non-governmental organizations on foreign policy. Rather than focusing on any particular country, the course draws upon the experiences of a variety of Western democratic states utilizing case studies of American, British, French and Canadian foreign policy to illustrate and evaluate course themes.
POLI 617 Knowledge in International Relations
This course examines the creation and use of expertise in policy-making, including questions of knowledge construction, the sway of science versus norms on decision-makers, and the impact of bureaucratic processes on the quality of policy. Alternative conceptions of knowledge and its effects on decision-making from political science, sociology, economics, and psychology are applied to issues including national security, environmental politics and economics.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 687 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 618 Canadian Public Administration
Discussion is directed towards an understanding of public administration in the Canadian federal setting. Some of the main problems of public administration are related to important changes which have taken place over the last twenty years and which are continuing to take place.
POLI 619 International Peacekeeping
This course is a seminar on the theory and practice of multinational peace and stability operations. The course covers theoretical perspectives on peace operations; the origins and evolution of peace operations, with particular focus on the expansion and transformation of peace operations since the end of the Cold War; the organizational and international politics of peace operations; causes of peace operations’ success and failure; problems of managing and coordinating actors involved in peace operations; and prospects for organizational learning and reform. The course examines specific cases of peacekeeping, peacebuilding and peace enforcement.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 687 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 621 Political Leadership and Decision Making
This course considers the ways political actors attempt policy and institutional changes through an examination of leadership skills and decision making styles. It considers the philosophical treatments by Plato and Machiavelli and the relationship between morality and leadership by analyzing modern leadership within a constrained constitutional context.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under POLI 687M may not take this course for credit.
POLI 622 Comparative Public Administration
A comparative study of the public administration systems in various western countries with emphasis on a comparison vis-à-vis the Canadian federal system.
POLI 623 Ethics, Morality and Justice
This course focuses on the essential political concepts of ethics, justice and morality which underlie and motivate almost all political activity. The course explores both ancient and contemporary perspectives on the meaning of these concepts and examines the problems and theoretical challenges that arise when a definitive notion of justice is used to assess or generate public policy.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 685 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 624 Public Administration of Intergovernmental Affairs
This course deals with intergovernmental affairs that have become a significant part of the policy process in many countries. An analysis of power relations in the federal state, both in institutional and societal terms, will be a primary focus of this course. The Canadian case will serve as the main area of inquiry.
POLI 625 Policy Discourse of Biotechnology
This course examines the philosophical, political, and theoretical counsel to policymakers and broader public discourse surrounding the development and implementation of new laws and regulations pertaining to issues in advanced biotechnology, such as cloning, stem cell research, and psychopharmacology.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 685 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 626 Seminar in Comparative Politics
This course is a survey of the field of comparative politics. It examines major theories, concepts and methods of comparative political analysis.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 681 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 628 Ethics and Values in Public Policy Making
This course provokes critical thinking on value judgements underlying policy-making and familiarizes students with practical measures available for promoting integrity in public institutions. Students examine the principles underlying ethical standards, various professional codes of ethics, issues such as potential conflicts between personal convictions and public duties, and the ethical responsibility of public officials and civil servants in democratic societies.
POLI 629 Critical Perspectives in Development
This course examines key debates surrounding the concept and the politics of development in the ‘less developed’ world with a particular emphasis on institutional structures, such as the state, the market and non-governmental organizations, through which development has been pursued.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under POLI 687K may not take this course for credit.
POLI 630 0rganization Theory
This is a seminar in organization theory, an interdisciplinary field concerned with the sources, determinants, functions, and effects of complex organizations. The course focuses on political organizations and the political effects of organizations by reviewing the historical development of organization theory and considering how current debates help us understand the nature and functions of organizations in the twenty-first century. Topics include the nature and sources of formal organizations; organizational structure; organizational decision-making; organizational culture; organizational reliability and failure; and the interaction between organizations and their environments.
POLI 631 Political Texts
The course is an intensive study of a text by a major author such as Plato, Machiavelli, Hobbes, or Nietzsche. Students systematically explore the issues and problems raised by the text and the interpretive traditions that follow from it.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 685 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 632 Seminar in Political Theory
This course is a survey of leading research in and approaches to political theory and political philosophy, including the history of political thought, normative political theory and contemporary political thought.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 685 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 634 Policy Analysis and Program Evaluation
This course focuses upon methods of assessing consequences of public policies. The main purpose of the course is to allow students to survey evaluation research in political science and to present research designs that will enable them to make plausible assumptions about the outcome of governmental programs in the absence of experimental control.
POLI 635 Biotechnology, Agriculture and Food Policy
The purpose of this course is to explore the ethical and policy dilemmas that rapid scientific and technological advances in biotechnology pose for issues of agriculture and food security. The course focuses on Canadian policy within a comparative perspective and examines alternative policy responses, such as found in the US, EU and developing countries.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 685 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 636 Theories of Public Policy and Public Administration
The course explores the diverse intellectual and ideological origins of Public Administration and Public Policy. The focus is on the comparative and critical analysis of the theoretical models under study. Students are encouraged to think analytically and to apply theoretical frameworks to their own empirical enquiries.
POLI 637 Democracy and Regime Change
This seminar examines the various definitions and understandings of democratic and authoritarian regimes and the principal moments of regime change (breakdown, transition, post-transition, and consolidation). It focuses on institution-building, the actors involved in the process of regime change and the political economy of transitions.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under POLI 687B may not take this course for credit.
POLI 638 Seminar in Canadian and Quebec Politics
This course is a survey of the field at an advanced level. It presents a discussion of contemporary issues and controversies in Canadian and Quebec Politics.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 683 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 643 Rational and Public Choice
This course deals with understanding the micro-analytical foundations of individual and group behaviour in political life. It introduces students to the main concepts, theorems and their applications in positive analytical politics including game theory, spatial modeling and institutional analysis.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under POLI 687C may not take this course for credit.
POLI 644 Research Methods
This course introduces students to the logic and methodology of Political Science research and public policy analysis.
POLI 645 Indigenous Peoples and the State
This course examines the political and administrative context in which Indigenous Peoples and the state coexist as well as the tensions between European and Indigenous modes of governance. It focuses on the evolution of institutions and policies regulating this relationship, and the governance strategies developed consistent with Indigenous traditions. The Canadian case serves as the focus but other countries may be considered.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under POLI 683M may not take this course for credit.
POLI 646 History of Thought in Political Economy
This course presents a survey of the major ideas which have shaped the various approaches to political economy from the classical theorists to twentieth century thinkers. The historical and contemporary influence of these ideas on public policy is evaluated.
POLI 647 International Human Security
An introduction to the growing literature and controversies surrounding the concept of ‘human security’ in international politics, applied specifically to the Canadian foreign policy context. Examined actors include states, non-governmental organizations, international institutions, and ‘civil society’.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under POLI 687O may not take this course for credit.
POLI 648 Feminist Critiques of Public Policy
This course provides an in-depth examination of feminist and critical perspectives of public policy and administration. The course seeks to examine the ways in which social location is implicated in (and mediated by) public policy theory and practice. Specific topics may include the state of bureaucracy, state-society relations, public policy discourses, structures, processes and outcomes, and substantive issue areas, such as body politics, social and economic policy, and the labour market.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 683 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 649 Gender and Global Politics
This seminar focuses on the intersection of the global and the local through different methodological and theoretical approaches to the study of gender. Drawing from texts from the fields of comparative politics, international relations and sociology, the course exposes class participants to different scholarly treatments of gender and politics especially as these treatments have evolved in a post-Cold War era of increasing globalization.
POLI 652 Science, Technology and Power
This course introduces students to the growing field of science policy analysis. It provides an overview of the theoretical approaches and analytical tools used in the area and critically discusses various policy mechanisms now in place as well as current and emerging issues.
POLI 654 Concepts of the State
This course examines several of the most significant attempts made by modern political thinkers to answer the question, “What is the modern state?” It addresses both the historical emergence of the modern state and the various ways that this emergence has been theorized. Special emphasis is placed on the differences and interconnections between historical, theoretical, and practical questions.
POLI 657 Nationalism and Ethnicity
This seminar discusses the nature, dynamics and consequences of nationalism. The emphasis is placed on presenting and discussing various theoretical understandings of identity and nationalist mobilization. It examines conceptual issues relating to the study of nationalism, namely the nature, origins and characterizations of nations and nationalism and the strategies for regulation of nationalist conflict.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under POLI 687H may not take this course for credit.
POLI 658 Authors of the Political Imagination
This course examines a broad range of literary and non-literary genres for their potential to inform and redirect the political imagination. The seminar adopts a broadly comparative perspective on literature, culture, politics and individual motivation.
POLI 659 International Organizations
This course explores the role of international organizations, institutions and regimes in world politics. The course covers intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations as well as informal institutional arrangements. It surveys theoretical debates regarding the origins, dynamics, and significance of international organizations, and examines their role in areas such as international security, international political economy, and regional integration. The course also considers debates over democratic accountability within international organizations and the efficacy of global governance.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 687 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 662 International Political Economy
This course covers theories from macroeconomics and international relations and their application to major historical and contemporary events in the evolution of the global political economy. Topics include international trade and finance, economic development,regional integration and globalization, North-South relations, the emergence of multinational corporations, and international organizations such as the World Bank, IMF, WTO, OECD, and UNCTAD.
POLI 681 Special Topics in Comparative Politics
POLI 683 Special Topics in Public Policy and Administration
POLI 684 Special Topics in Canadian and Quebec Politics
POLI 685 Special Topics in Political Theory
POLI 687 Special Topics in International Politics
POLI 691 Extended Research Essay (12 credits)
The Extended Research Essay is a directed study supervised by a faculty member with whom a student completed a course in their area of concentration. Requiring additional research, this degree requirement builds on a term paper submitted at the graduate level in a concentration course and is considered to be a significant revision and extension of that paper, with an extensive bibliography.
POLI 693 Internship with Research Paper (21 credits)
The Internship is a four-month job placement in either the public or private sector. Under the direction of a faculty supervisor, the student prepares an original, theoretical work that comprises a series of policy recommendations that contribute to the policy process in Canada.
POLI 695 Directed Studies
Independent study in the area of concentration.
Cognate Courses
Students may enrol in cognate courses in the John Molson School of Business and in the Departments of Communication Studies, Economics, Education, and Sociology and Anthropology in the Faculty of Arts and Science. Permission of the Graduate Program Directors of both the Master of/Magisteriate in Arts (Public Policy and Public Administration) and the second department is required.
PSYC 844, 845, 846 or 847 (3 to12 credits). Each 3-credit seminar may be taken up to 4 times as an elective option provided the topic differs.
PSYC 700, 701, 714, 716, 721, 722, 724, 725, 726,727, 734, 850, or 851 (6-15 credits). Special Topics seminars PSYC 721, 722, 724, 725, 726, and 727 may be taken multiple times as an elective option provided that the course content has changed.
Research and Clinical Training Option (18 credits):
In addition to the core courses, students select from the following sets of courses for a maximum of 18 credits:
PSYC 823, 824, or 825 (3 credits); PSYC 834 (3 credits); PSYC 835, 836, or 837 (3 credits); PSYC 841, 842, or 843 (3 credits); PSYC 838, 839, or 840 (3 credits); and PSYC 885 (3 credits).
At least one adult and one child client must be seen in the required practicum courses ((APC Practicum II or III, Extramural Practicum I). All students following the Research and Clinical Training Option are expected to attend case conferences at the Applied Psychology Centre training clinic.
Academic Regulations
Academic Standing. Please refer to the Academic Standing section of the Calendar for a detailed review of the Academic Regulations.
Time Limit. Please refer to the Academic Regulation page for further details regarding the Time Limit requirements. In the case of the Diploma in Clinical Psychology, the time limit is 9 terms (3 years) for full-time students; for part-time students the time limit is 15 terms (5 years).
Graduation Requirement. In order to graduate, students must have a cumulative GPA of at least 3.00.
Courses
The following are 3-credit courses unless otherwise indicated.
PSYC 700 Psychopathology
Prerequisite: Undergraduate course in behaviour disorders or equivalent.
This seminar deals with historical and current approaches to the study of behaviour disorders and problems of life adjustment in both adults and children, including critical evaluation of empirical findings in selected areas. Classification systems, including the current revision of the APA Diagnostic and Statistical Manual, are critically reviewed. Students with credit for PSYC 660 or 860 may not take this course for credit.
PSYC 701 Models of Assessment I
Prerequisite: PSYC 700; Co-requisite: PSYC 706 or permission of the Director of Clinical Training.
Focusing on cognitive and ability testing of children and adults, this course stresses the conceptual bases of ability testing, research results and their implications for test interpretation, and strengths and limitations of current test batteries for children and adults. Specific course content includes: a) measurement theory, including issues of test construction, reliability, validity, and evaluation; b) appropriate use and interpretation of specific cognitive assessment batteries (e.g. the Wechsler and Stanford-Binet scales for children and adults); and c) special assessment issues, including the testing of minorities and assessment-related ethical problems. A practicum in assessment techniques (PSYC 706) is typically taken in conjunction with this course.
PSYC 714 Central Topics in Psychology (6 credits)
This general seminar deals with basic theoretical and research issues in Psychology. Topics are drawn from a wide range of areas in Psychology including perceptual and cognitive processes, learning, motivation, and psycho-pathology. Issues are considered with respect to developmental, physiological and social approaches. Students who have received credit for PSYC 602 may not take this course for credit.
PSYC 716 Advanced Human Development
This seminar on theory and research focuses on human development and developmental processes. Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided that the course content has changed. Change in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number.
PSYC 721 Special Topics Seminar
This seminar provides an advanced treatment of specialized research literature in an integrative or selected area of psychology outside the department’s major areas of specialization. It may be offered as a seminar, tutorial or directed reading course, or in any other format, subject to approval of the program director. Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course multiple times provided that the course content has changed.
PSYC 722 Focused Topic Seminar (1.5 credits)
This seminar provides an advanced treatment of specialized research literature in a selected area of psychology. It may be offered as a seminar, tutorial or directed reading course, or in any other format, subject to approval of the program director. Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course multiple times provided that the course content has changed.
PSYC 724 Special Topics in Clinical and Health Psychology
This course provides an advanced treatment of specialized research literature in an area of clinical and/or health psychology. It may be offered as a seminar, tutorial or directed reading course, or in any other format, subject to approval of the program director. Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course multiple times provided that the course content has changed.
PSYC 725 Special Topics in Cognitive Science
This course provides an advanced treatment of specialized research literature in an area of cognitive science. It may be offered as a seminar, tutorial or directed reading course, or in any other format, subject to approval of the program director. Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course multiple times provided that the course content has changed.
PSYC 726 Special Topics in Human Development
This course provides an advanced treatment of specialized research literature in an area of human development and developmental processes. It may be offered as a seminar, tutorial or directed reading course, or in any other format, subject to approval of the program director. Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course multiple times provided that the course content has changed.
PSYC 727 Special Topics in Behavioural Neuroscience
This course provides an advanced treatment of specialized research literature in an area of behavioural neuroscience. It may be offered as a seminar, tutorial or directed reading course, or in any other format, subject to approval of the program director. Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course multiple times provided that the course content has changed.
PSYC 734 Multivariate Statistics
Prerequisite: PSYC 601.
Building upon material presented in PSYC 601, this course covers latent variable analyses and multivariate procedures, including factor analysis, structural equation modelling, multiple group models, and multilevel modelling.
PSYC 801 Research Seminar I
A seminar attended by all doctoral students in which specific research proposals and related theoretical issues and methodological problems are presented for discussion by students and participating faculty.
PSYC 802 Research Seminar II
A continuation of PSYC 801.
PSYC 823 APC Practicum III: General
Prerequisite: PSYC 708 (or 709 or 710), 711 (or 712 or 713). Prerequisite or Co-requisite: PSYC 834, 835 (or 836 or 837), and permission of the Director of Clinical Training.
Advanced students are expected to begin to define clinical interests and treatment methods consonant with their career goals. They receive the appropriate clinical experience and supervision in this practicum (e.g., working with children, adolescents, adults, working with clients who present particular types of problems).
PSYC 824 APC Practicum III: Adult
Prerequisite: PSYC 708 (or 709 or 710), 711 (or 712 or 713). Prerequisite or Co-requisite: PSYC 834, 835 (or 836 or 837), and permission of the Director of Clinical Training.
Advanced students are expected to begin to define clinical interests and treatment methods consonant with their career goals. They receive the appropriate clinical experience and supervision in this practicum working with adult clients, e.g. working with a particular orientation and/or with particular types of problems.
PSYC 825 APC Practicum III: Child
Prerequisite: PSYC 708 (or 709 or 710), 711 (or 712 or 713). Prerequisite or Co-requisite: PSYC 834, 835 (or 836 or 837), and permission of the Director of Clinical Training.
Advanced students are expected to begin to define clinical interests and treatment methods consonant with their career goals. They receive the appropriate clinical experience and supervision in this practicum working with child clients and families, e.g. working with a particular orientation and/or with particular types of problems.
PSYC 826 APC Practicum IV: General
Prerequisite: PSYC 823 (or 824 or 825) and permission of the Director of Clinical Training.
This course is a specialized practicum for advanced students involving clinical experience under supervision.
PSYC 827 APC Practicum IV: Adult
Prerequisite: PSYC 823 (or 824 or 825) and permission of the Director of Clinical Training.
This course is a specialized practicum for advanced students involving clinical experience with adult clients under supervision.
PSYC 828 APC Practicum IV: Child
Prerequisite: PSYC 823 (or 824 or 825) and permission of the Director of Clinical Training.
This course is a specialized practicum for advanced students involving clinical experience with child clients under supervision.
PSYC 834 Advanced Clinical Seminar I
Prerequisite: PSYC 711 (or 712 or 713), 708 (or 709 or 710), and permission of Director of Clinical Training.
This seminar provides an advanced treatment of issues in current psychological theory and research that are relevant to clinical practice, e.g., causal models and their assumptions, legal and ethical issues, classification by state, trait, and situational context; brain-behaviour relations. The aims are to foster in students a) regular review of clinically relevant literature; b) a critical perspective regarding current clinical practices; and c) guidelines and criteria for optimal assessment and treatment decisions tailored to the needs of clients.
PSYC 835 Advanced Clinical Seminar II: Adult
Prerequisite: PSYC 834.
The seminar provides an advanced analysis of issues in the assessment and treatment of behaviour disorders in adulthood. Prototype cases are presented for illustrative discussion of particular clinical issues, e.g. indicators of risk for suicide, homicide, and psychosis; imagery and dreams in psychological treatment; stress-related physical disorders; anxiety-spectrum disorders; treatment for couples, families, and groups. Assessment and treatment approaches to particular disorders are compared with reference to etiological assumptions and levels of inference.
PSYC 836 Advanced Clinical Seminar II: Child
Prerequisite: PSYC 834.
The seminar provides an advanced analysis of issues in the assessment and treatment of behaviour disorders in children in a developmental context. Prototype cases are presented for illustrative discussion of particular clinical issues, e.g. stress-related physical disorders; family therapy; child abuse; age-related symptom expression and variability; non-verbal therapies.
PSYC 837 Advanced Clinical Seminar II: General
Prerequisite: PSYC 834.
This seminar is a blend of issues examined in PSYC 835 and 836 (see above).
PSYC 838 Extramural Practicum II: General
Prerequisite: PSYC 708 (or 709 or 710), 711 (or 712 or 713), and permission of the Director of Clinical Training.
This course is a senior extramural practicum, done under qualified supervision in an applied setting approved by the department’s practicum committee, e.g. hospitals, clinics, schools, community and rehabilitation centres.
PSYC 839 Extramural Practicum II: Adult
Prerequisite: PSYC 708 (or 709 or 710), 711 (or 712 or 713), and permission of the Director of Clinical Training.
This course is a senior extramural practicum with adult clients, done under qualified supervision in an applied setting approved by the department’s practicum committee, e.g. hospitals, clinics, schools, community and rehabilitation centres.
PSYC 840 Extramural Practicum II: Child
Prerequisite: PSYC 708 (or 709 or 710), 711 (or 712 or 713), and permission of the Director of Clinical Training.
This course is a senior extramural practicum with child clients done under qualified supervision in an applied setting approved by the department’s practicum committee, e.g. hospitals, clinics, schools, community and rehabilitation centres.
PSYC 841 Extramural Practicum III: General
This course is a senior extramural practicum, done under qualified supervision in an applied setting approved by the department’s practicum committee, e.g. hospitals, clinics, schools, community and rehabilitation centres.
PSYC 842 Extramural Practicum III: Adult
This course is a senior extramural practicum with adult clients, done under qualified supervision in an applied setting approved by the department’s practicum committee, e.g. hospitals, clinics, schools, community and rehabilitation centres.
PSYC 843 Extramural Practicum III: Child
This course is a senior extramural practicum with child clients, done under qualified supervision in an applied setting approved by the department’s practicum committee, e.g. hospitals, clinics, schools, community and rehabilitation centres.
PSYC 844 Clinical and Health Research Area Seminar II
This seminar provides the opportunity for faculty and students working in clinical and health psychology to present and discuss their current research.
Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course up to 4 times provided that the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. PSYC 844A, PSYC 844B.
PSYC 845 Cognitive Science Area Seminar II
This seminar provides the opportunity for faculty and students working in cognitive science to present and discuss their current research.
Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course up to 4 times provided that the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. PSYC 845A, PSYC 845B.
PSYC 846 Human Development Area Seminar II
This seminar provides the opportunity for faculty and students working on human development and developmental processes to present and discuss their current research.
Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course up to 4 times provided that the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. PSYC 846A, PSYC 846B.
PSYC 847 Behavioural Neuroscience Area Seminar II
This seminar provides the opportunity for faculty and students working in behavioural neuroscience to present and discuss their current research.
Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course up to 4 times provided that the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. PSYC 847A, PSYC 847B.
PSYC 850 Practicum in Research Techniques (3 or 6 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the PhD Program Director.
This practicum is designed to give students the opportunity to develop their research skills by such activities as learning new experimental and technical approaches, developing instruments or computer programs to support research, developing expertise in advanced statistical methods, or other equivalent activities.
PSYC 851 Teaching of Research Techniques
Prerequisite: Permission of PhD Program Director.
This practicum is designed to train students in the teaching of research techniques. Under supervision, the student is responsible for training an apprentice in specialized experimental skills or research techniques that may include advanced statistical methods, or other equivalent activities. Prior to beginning the work, students submit a detailed outline of the planned teaching activities to be approved by the program director.
PSYC 880 PhD Comprehensive Examination (non-credit)
PSYC 885 Predoctoral Internship
Prerequisite: PSYC 835 (or 836 or 837), 823 (824 or 825), and permission of the Director of Clinical Training.
The pre-doctoral internship consists of the equivalent of 12 months full-time employment under qualified supervision in an applied setting approved by the department’s internship committee. The internship is usually done after completion of course requirements, and after data collection and analysis, and a draft of the doctoral thesis have been completed.
PSYC 890 Research and Thesis (60 credits)
PSYC 690 Research and Thesis (30 credits)
PSYC 700 Psychopathology
Prerequisite: Undergraduate course in behaviour disorders or equivalent.
This seminar deals with historical and current approaches to the study of behaviour disorders and problems of life adjustment in both adults and children, including critical evaluation of empirical findings in selected areas. Classification systems, including the current revision of the APA Diagnostic and Statistical Manual, are critically reviewed. Students with credit for PSYC 660 or 860 may not take this course for credit.
PSYC 714 Central Topics in Psychology (6 credits)
This general seminar deals with basic theoretical and research issues in Psychology. Topics are drawn from a wide range of areas in Psychology including perceptual and cognitive processes, learning, motivation, and psycho-pathology. Issues are considered with respect to developmental, physiological and social approaches. Students who have received credit for PSYC 602 may not take this course for credit.
PSYC 716 Advanced Human Development
This seminar on theory and research focuses on human development and developmental processes. Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided that the course content has changed. Change in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number.
PSYC 721 Special Topics Seminar
This seminar provides an advanced treatment of specialized research literature in an integrative or selected area of psychology outside the department’s major areas of specialization. It may be offered as a seminar, tutorial or directed reading course, or in any other format, subject to approval of the program director. Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course multiple times provided that the course content has changed.
PSYC 722 Focused Topic Seminar (1.5 credits)
This seminar provides an advanced treatment of specialized research literature in a selected area of psychology. It may be offered as a seminar, tutorial or directed reading course, or in any other format, subject to approval of the program director. Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course multiple times provided that the course content has changed.
PSYC 724 Special Topics in Clinical and Health Psychology
This course provides an advanced treatment of specialized research literature in an area of clinical and/or health psychology. It may be offered as a seminar, tutorial or directed reading course, or in any other format, subject to approval of the program director. Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course multiple times provided that the course content has changed.
PSYC 725 Special Topics in Cognitive Science
This course provides an advanced treatment of specialized research literature in an area of cognitive science. It may be offered as a seminar, tutorial or directed reading course, or in any other format, subject to approval of the program director. Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course multiple times provided that the course content has changed.
PSYC 726 Special Topics in Human Development
This course provides an advanced treatment of specialized research literature in an area of human development and developmental processes. It may be offered as a seminar, tutorial or directed reading course, or in any other format, subject to approval of the program director. Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course multiple times provided that the course content has changed.
PSYC 727 Special Topics in Behavioural Neuroscience
This course provides an advanced treatment of specialized research literature in an area of behavioural neuroscience. It may be offered as a seminar, tutorial or directed reading course, or in any other format, subject to approval of the program director. Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course multiple times provided that the course content has changed.
PSYC 734 Multivariate Statistics
Prerequisite: PSYC 601.
Building upon material presented in PSYC 601, this course covers latent variable analyses and multivariate procedures, including factor analysis, structural equation modelling, multiple group models, and multilevel modelling.
RELI 6040 Guided Research Project Proposal (Judaic Studies) (3 credits)
The proposal for the guided research project (GRP) is 2,500-3,000 words in length. The GRP proposal outlines the nature of the student’s project, whether a research paper, artistic or technical project. It outlines how the project is connected to a student’s coursework, career or academic goals and the timeframe in which they complete the project. It includes a bibliography of at least ten academic sources, and any primary materials (such as editions of critical texts), which the students use.
RELI 6041 Guided Research Project (Judaic Studies) (24 credits)
The guided research project (GRP) is 11,000-12,500 words (about 40-50 pages) in length, exclusive of footnotes and bibliography. The GRP is usually undertaken in a student’s third or fourth semester (after the completion of coursework). This research paper develops themes or subjects with which the student engaged in his or her coursework. Students in the MA in Judaic Studies write on an aspect of Jewish history or culture.
Thesis Option
RELI 6050 Thesis Proposal (Judaic Studies) (3 credits)
The proposal for the thesis is 2,500-3,000 words in length. A thesis proposal outlines the student’s proposed research project, locates their research in relation to existing scholarship, clarifies their methodology and research questions, and includes a bibliography of at least ten academic sources, and any primary materials (such as editions of critical texts), which the students use.
RELI 6051 Thesis (Judaic Studies) (30 credits)
The thesis is 18,000-24,000 words (about 60-80 pages) in length, exclusive of footnotes and bibliography. The thesis provides an opportunity for the student to both demonstrate their historical and cultural knowledge and depth of understanding of a particular subject in the study of religions and cultures. Students in the MA in Judaic Studies write on an aspect of Jewish history or culture. Students also demonstrate facility with one or two methodological approaches studied in the course of their program and illustrate their capacity to apply the approaches to a particular problem or issue in religious studies. Thesis writers have the requisite language skills to undertake this more rigorous type of research, for instance, Yiddish or Hebrew.
RELI 6020 Guided Research Project Proposal (Religions and Cultures) (3 credits)
The proposal for the guided research project (GRP) is 2,500-3,000 words in length. The GRP proposal outlines the nature of the student’s project, whether a research paper, artistic or technical project. It outlines how the project is connected to a student’s coursework, career or academic goals and the timeframe in which they complete the project. It includes a bibliography of at least ten academic sources, and any primary materials (such as editions of critical texts), which the students use.
RELI 6021 Guided Research Project (Religions and Cultures) (24 credits)
The guided research project (GRP) is 11,000-12,500 words (about 40-50 pages) in length, exclusive of footnotes and bibliography. The GRP is usually undertaken in a student’s third or fourth semester (after the completion of coursework). This research paper develops themes or subjects with which a student engaged in his or her course work.
Thesis Option
RELI 6030 Thesis Proposal (Religions and Cultures) (3 credits)
The proposal for the thesis is 2,500-3,000 words in length. A thesis proposal outlines the student’s proposed research project, locates their research in relation to existing scholarship, clarifies their methodology and research questions, and includes a bibliography of at least ten academic sources, and any primary materials (such as editions of critical texts), which the students use.
RELI 6031 Thesis (Religions and Cultures) (30 credits)
The thesis is 18,000-24,000 words (about 60-80 pages) in length, exclusive of footnotes and bibliography. The thesis provides an opportunity for the student to both demonstrate their historical and cultural knowledge and depth of understanding of a particular subject in the study of religions and cultures. Students also demonstrate facility with one or two methodological approaches studied in the course of their program, and illustrate their capacity to apply them to a particular problem or issue in religious studies. Thesis writers have the requisite language skills to undertake this more rigorous type of research, for instance, Sanskrit, Yiddish, Hebrew, Arabic, or Greek.
SCPA 501 Introduction to Community Economic Development (3 credits)
This course provides an overview of CED. It traces the historical and intellectual roots of CED as well as critically situates CED in the context of theories of community, local and regional development. Students are provided with basic tools of macro-economic analysis and policy evaluation as it relates to the practice of CED. This course focuses on the institutional environment in which CED initiatives operate to identify the potential and the limitations of local, community-based development strategies. Special focus is given to the perspectives of CED arising out of the feminist movement, cultural communities, Aboriginal communities, the popular sector and other social change movements.
SCPA 502 Comparative Approaches and Models in CED (3 credits)
This course focuses on the objectives of CED by examining the various strategies and diversity of models of CED practices in Quebec, as well as many found elsewhere in Canada, the United States, in Europe and in southern hemispheric countries. The differences in organizational structures and empowerment processes, as well as their social, cultural and economic context is studied and evaluated, mainly through case studies of selected communities.
SCPA 503 Fundamental Skills for CED Practice (3 credits)
This course focuses on helping students acquire a working knowledge of the practical skills required for building community economic capacity. This includes developing tools to map the material, environmental and human resources within communities. This course assists students in designing socio-economic indicators and a framework for evaluation of CED initiatives and strategic planning. Students are encouraged to identify, as soon as possible, how the use of such skills can be incorporated into either a CED project or an internship within a CED initiative.
SCPA 504 Community Organizing and CED (3 credits)
This course focuses on helping students acquire a working knowledge of the practical skills required in community organizing and capacity building for individual and community empowerment within a CED context. The course explores the role of popular education in community mobilization and collective action, and delves into the strategies, tactics and techniques of community intervention.
SCPA 505 Social Enterprise Development and Social Entrepreneurship (3 credits)
This course provides a framework for business development within a CED perspective. Basic tools for enterprise development, including comprehensive business planning, data evaluation, financial analysis, and forecasting are to be integrated into a social and ethical framework to maintain the democratic objectives of CED. Students develop skills in evaluating a successful commercial venture within the context of these larger objectives.
Project
SCPA 510 CED Field Project - Part I (3 credits)
SCPA 510 structures the Field Project. It introduces students to tools that can be used to design and implement their projects. During this course, students begin to implement their plan with the host organization. Assignments are based on the integration of the tools with the work undertaken in the field project.
Note: This course is part of the requirement that students complete a two-semester field project in some aspect of community economic development. This project is selected and negotiated by the student with a community organization and addresses a particular challenge raised within this setting.
SCPA 511 CED Field Project - Part II (3 credits)
Prerequisite: SCPA 510.
Students continue their field project for a second term within the framework of this course. They build on the practice of the previous term and advance it to reach the objectives established with their host organization. This course aims to strengthen the student’s skills in the critical evaluation of practice. Students examine their practice and the reasons for its success, as well as examine strategies for overcoming the barriers they faced. This course offers a framework for the final written report required of students, to be both shared with their host organizations and submitted for the course.
Areas of Concentration: Elective Courses
Areas of concentration are identified according to CED practices in order to help students choose elective courses relevant to their fields of professional specialization or of personal interest. Students will have indicated their priority areas of concentration on their application for admission form.
Up to five areas of concentration are offered, resources permitting, in a given year. The areas are: financing CED initiatives; housing, land use, and urban planning from a CED perspective; communications, technology and CED; international development and CED; Aboriginal CED.
Courses corresponding to these areas of concentration are the following:
SCPA 508 Financing CED Initiatives: Part I (3 credits)
This course examines the roles which can be played by both traditional (banks) and non-traditional (community loan funds) financial institutions in supporting CED initiatives. Special emphasis is placed on exploring alternative financial CED structures. Skills are developed to understand and generate financial planning, as well as investment decisions in traditional and non-traditional enterprises.
SCPA 509 Financing CED Initiatives: Part II (3 credits)
Prerequisite: SCPA 508.
This course uses a case study approach to critically examine and evaluate existing alternative CED initiatives in Canada and the US. This may include on site visits, interviews and occasional guest lecturers.
SCPA 515 Housing and Land Use from a CED Perspective: Part I (3 credits)
This course examines the institutional, economic, political, and environmental factors which affect land policy, and the development of affordable housing. It identifies public and private financial sources and various forms of ownership models including community land trusts and housing cooperatives, among others. Among the skills developed are those related to market analysis and housing needs assessment, site selection and control, and preparing housing projects.
SCPA 516 Housing and Land Use from a CED Perspective: Part II (3 credits)
Prerequisite: SCPA 515.
This course uses a case study approach to critically examine and evaluate existing housing projects, affordable housing and land policy based on a selection of experiences in the U.S. and in Canada. This may include on site visits, interviews and occasional guest lecturers.
SCPA 522 Communications, Technology and CED: Part I (3 credits)
This course explores issues related to information management, analysis and dissemination using different vehicles available including mass media, the Internet, and other new technologies as they emerge. Basic computer literacy is required.
SCPA 523 Communications, Technology and CED: Part II (3 credits)
Prerequisite: SCPA 522.
This course equips practitioners with skills required to share and diffuse CED practices across communities that work in isolation and helps to develop the skills required for communities to use the new technologies and resources necessary for development purposes.
SCPA 529 International Development and CED: Part I (3 credits)
This course explores community-based economic development approaches in countries of the South within their socio-political and historical context. Many economic initiatives in the North have borrowed from these experiences. The course explores the advantages and disadvantages of importing and exporting development models and practices and equips the students with the skills to evaluate the appropriateness of CED models and how to adapt the models, wherever required.
SCPA 530 International Development and CED: Part II (3 credits)
Prerequisite: SCPA 529.
This course explores existing North/South networking and collaboration by identifying non-governmental organizations, community groups and social movements which are working together to develop CED strategies in their respective countries. Discussion is encouraged through class seminars and occasional guest lectures.
SCPA 536 Aboriginal CED: Part I (3 credits)
This course assists participants in exploring specific issues related to Aboriginal community economic development in particular settings (on reserve, urban, rural and northern communities), and addresses challenges common to Aboriginal CED. The course assists participants in exploring historical and contemporary relationships between Aboriginal communities and the predominant cultural and economic forces, and compares traditional Aboriginal organizing and economic practices with the new approaches being proposed by CED.
SCPA 537 Aboriginal CED: Part II (3 credits)
Prerequisite: SCPA 536.
This course uses a case study approach to evaluate one or more community economic development strategies applied within an Aboriginal community. A historical overview of this experience outlines the cultural and political context which has shaped these strategies as well as their results. CED approaches are examined in the context of this individual experience. This course may include on site visits and guest lecturers.
Open Sessions
SCPA 543 A-Z Open Sessions (1 credit each)
The themes and content of the various open sessions are determined at the beginning of each academic year. Three open sessions are offered every year (1 credit each for a total of 3 credits). Possible topics may include: feminist approaches to CED, lobbying decision-making bodies, consensus management, coalition-building, and using the internet for community development purposes - as well as topics related to current events.
SCPA 501 : Introduction au développement économique communautaire (3 crédits)
Ce cours offre une vue d’ensemble du DÉC. Il retrace l’historique et les fondements intellectuels du DÉC et situe le DÉC par rapport aux théories du développement communautaire local et régional. Le cours fournit également aux étudiant-e-s des outils de base pour l’analyse macro-économique et pour l’évaluation des politiques sociales relatives à la pratique du DÉC. Ce cours se concentre sur l’environnement institutionnel dans lequel les initiatives de DÉC opèrent afin d’identifier le potentiel et les limites des stratégies de développement axées sur les communautés locales. Une attention particulière est portée aux perspectives de DÉC émanant du mouvement féministe, des communautés culturelles, des communautés autochtones, du mouvement populaire et d’autres mouvements de changement social.
SCPA 502 : Approches comparatives et modèles de DÉC (3 crédits)
Ce cours se concentre sur les objectifs du DÉC en examinant les diverses stratégies et les différents modèles de pratique de DÉC au Québec, ainsi qu’ailleurs au Canada, aux États-Unis, en Europe et dans les pays de l’hémisphère sud. Des études de cas de communautés sélectionnées sont principalement utilisées afin d’étudier et d’évaluer les différences existant au sein des structures organisationnelles et des processus d’empowerment, ainsi que leur contexte social, culturel et économique.
SCPA 503 : Compétences de base en DÉC (3 crédits)
Ce cours aide les étudiants et étudiantes à acquérir une connaissance d’usage des compétences pratiques requises pour bâtir la capacité de prise en charge économique d’une communauté. Ceci comprend l’élaboration d’outils permettant d’inventorier les ressources matérielles, environnementales et humaines au sein d’une communauté. Ce cours aide aussi les étudiants et étudiantes à élaborer des indices socio-économiques ainsi qu’un cadre d’évaluation des initiatives de DÉC et de la planification stratégique. Les étudiant-e-s sont encouragé-e-s, le plus tôt possible, à identifier comment ils/elles pourront inclure ces compétences dans un projet de DÉC ou un stage à l’intérieur d’une initiative de DÉC.
SCPA 504 : Organisation communautaire et DÉC (3 crédits)
Ce cours permet aux étudiant-e-s d’acquérir une connaissance d’usage des compétences pratiques nécessaires pour maîtriser l’organisation communautaire et pour développer l’empowerment des individus et des communautés dans un contexte de DÉC. Ce cours explore le rôle que joue l’éducation populaire dans la mobilisation des communautés et dans l’action collective, et approfondit les tactiques, stratégies et techniques de l’intervention communautaire.
SCPA 505 : Développement d’entreprises sociales et entreprenariat social (3 crédits)
Ce cours propose un cadre de référence pour le développement d’entreprises selon une perspective de DÉC. Des outils de base pour le développement d’entreprises, incluant le développement de plans d’affaires complets, l’évaluation de données, l’analyse financière et l’élaboration de prévisions, seront intégrés dans un cadre social et éthique afin de préserver les objectifs démocratiques du DÉC. Les étudiant-e-s développent les compétences requises afin d’évaluer le succès d’une entreprise commerciale en tenant compte du contexte global de ces objectifs.
Projet
SCPA 510 : Projet en DÉC. Partie I (3 crédits)
En suivant le programme à temps plein, les participant-e-s devront, une fois les trois premiers cours principaux du trimestre d’automne complétés, entreprendre un cours de projet de deux trimestres dans un domaine du développement économique communautaire relié à leur spécialisation ou à champ d’intérêts. Ce projet peut se dérouler au sein du milieu de travail ou de bénévolat du/de la participant-e.
Le projet pratique constitue une occasion pour les participant-e-s de faire face - de manière participative - à un défi particulier qui les passionne et qui est perçu comme important par l’organisme au sein duquel le projet se déroule. Les participant-e-s devront faire appel à leurs forces, leurs expériences passées, et leurs talents, tout en tenant compte de leurs objectifs d’apprentissage. Tous les participantes et participants devront assumer la responsabilité de définir, chercher et négocier leurs projets pratiques par eux-mêmes, avec, bien sur, l’appui du programme de diplôme de 2e cycle en DÉC.
SCPA 511 : Projet DÉC. Partie II (3 crédits)
Préalable : SCPA 510.
Dans la deuxième partie du cours, les participant-e-s analyseront de façon critique leur progrès au sein de leurs projets respectifs, et rédigeront un rapport final résumant et évaluant le projet et les expériences que celui-ci les a amené-e-s à vivre. Ce projet permettra de vérifier les compétences acquises et de valider les idées et théories apprises dans une situation réelle. Des practicien-ne-s de DÉC sont invité-e-s à participer à l’évaluation des résultats du projet.
Domaines de spécialisation : cours optionnels
Les domaines de spécialisation sont identifiés selon les pratiques de DÉC de façon à aider les étudiant-e-s à choisir des cours optionnels adaptés à leurs spécialités professionnelles ou leurs intérêts personnels; le choix de domaine de spécialisation est spécifié dans la demande d’admission.
Jusqu’à cinq domaines de spécialisation sont offerts chaque année. Les domaines identifiés sont: le financement des initiatives de DÉC; le logement, l’aménagement du territoire et l’urbanisme dans une perspective de DÉC; les communications, la technologie et le DÉC; le développement international et le DÉC; le DÉC en milieu autochtone.
Les cours qui correspondent à ces domaines de spécialisation sont les suivants:
SCPA 508 : Le financement des initiatives de DÉC. Partie I (3 crédits)
Ce cours permet d’étudier les rôles que peuvent jouer les institutions financières traditionnelles (les banques) et non traditionnelles (les associations communautaires de prêt) pour soutenir les initiatives de DÉC. Une attention particulière est portée à l’étude des structures financières alternatives de DÉC. Les compétences requises afin de comprendre et d’initier la planification financière ainsi que la prise de décision quant aux investissements dans les entreprises traditionnelles et non traditionnelles sont également développées.
SCPA 509 : Le financement des initiatives de DÉC. Partie II (3 crédits)
Préalable : SCPA 508.
La seconde partie de ce cours empruntera une approche d’étude de cas pour examiner de façon critique et évaluer des initiatives originales de DÉC au Canada et aux États-Unis. Cela pourrait comprendre la visite de sites, des entrevues et des conférences occasionnelles.
SCPA 515 : Logement et aménagement du territoire dans une perspective de DÉC. Partie I (3 crédits)
Ce cours examine les facteurs institutionnels, économiques, politiques et environnementaux qui influent sur la politique d’aménagement du territoire et la création de logements à prix modique. Il décrit aussi les sources financières publiques et privées ainsi que diverses formes de propriété, y compris les fiducies foncières communautaires et les coopératives de logement. Il permet d’acquérir, entre autres, des compétences en analyse du marché, évaluation des besoins en logement, sélection et contrôle des sites, et préparation de projets domiciliaires.
SCPA 516 : Logement et aménagement du territoire dans une perspective de DÉC. Partie II (3 crédits)
Préalable : SCPA 515.
Ce cours se fonde sur des études de cas américaines et canadiennes afin d’effectuer un examen critique et une évaluation de projets domiciliaires existants, du logement à prix modique et de la politique d’aménagement du territoire. Il pourrait comprendre des visite de sites, des entrevues et des conférences occasionnelles.
SCPA 522 : Communications, technologie et DÉC. Partie I (3 crédits)
Ce cours explore les questions liées à la gestion, à l’analyse et à la diffusion de l’information par différents moyens, y compris les médias de masse, Internet, et les technologies en émergence. Les participant-e-s doivent posséder des connaissances de base en informatique.
SCPA 523 : Communications, technologie et DÉC. Partie II (3 crédits)
Préalable : SCPA 522.
Ce cours dote les praticien-ne-s des compétences nécessaires pour diffuser largement les pratiques de DÉC dans des collectivités qui travaillent souvent dans l’isolement, et pour leur transmettre les compétences dont elles ont besoin afin d’utiliser les nouvelles technologies comme instruments de développement.
SCPA 529 : Développement international et DÉC. Partie I (3 crédits)
Ce cours examine les approches communautaires de développement économique des pays du Sud dans leur contexte socio-politique et historique. De nombreuses initiatives économiques du Nord s’inspirent de ces expériences. Le cours explore aussi les avantages et les désavantages de l’importation et de l’exportation de modèles et de pratiques de développement, et permet d’acquérir les compétences nécessaires pour évaluer l’à-propos de modèles de DÉC et les adapter, au besoin.
SCPA 530 : Développement international et DÉC. Partie II (3 crédits)
Préalable : SCPA 529.
La seconde partie de ce cours explore les réseaux et la collaboration Nord-Sud en identifiant les organismes non gouvernementaux, les groupes communautaires et les mouvements sociaux qui travaillent ensemble pour formuler des stratégies de DÉC dans leur pays respectif. On encourage la discussion par des séminaires et des conférences occasionnelles.
SCPA 536 : Le DÉC en mileu autochtone. Partie I (3 crédits)
Ce cours aide les participant-e-s à étudier des enjeux spécifiques liés au développement économique autochtone, en particulier le contexte (réserve, milieu urbain, rural ou nordique), ainsi qu’à affronter des défis fréquents en DÉC autochtone. Le cours étudie également les rapports historiques et contemporains entre les communautés autochtones et les forces culturelles et économiques prédominantes, et compare les pratiques organisationnelles et économiques traditionnelles avec les nouvelles approches que propose le DÉC.
SCPA 537 : Le DÉC en mileu autochtone. Partie II (3 crédits)
Préalable : SCPA 536.
Ce cours utilise une approche d’étude de cas pour évaluer une ou plusieurs stratégies de développement économique communautaire en contexte autochtone. Un survol historique de cette expérience dessine le contexte qui a façonné ces stratégies autant que leurs résultats. Les approches de DÉC sont examinées dans le contexte de cette expérience particulière. Cela peut comprendre la visite de sites et des conférences occasionnelles.
Sessions ouvertes
SCPA 543 : A - Z Sessions ouvertes (1 crédit chacune)
Les thèmes et contenu des diverses sessions ouvertes sont déterminés au début de chaque année académique. Trois sessions ouvertes sont offertes chaque année (1 crédit chacune sur un total de 3 crédits). Voici quelques-uns des sujets possibles : les approches féministes en développement économique communautaire, le lobbying auprès d’instances décisionnelles, la gestion consensuelle, et la formation de coalitions et l’usage d’internet dans un but de développement communautaire - de même que des sujets liés à l’actualité.
SOAN 800 General Seminar (6 credits)
This course focuses on orientating the common epistemological interests of sociological and anthropological approaches to social and cultural analysis in the four areas of specialization. In order to maximize interdisciplinary coverage, the seminar is led by two faculty members, one trained in sociology and one in anthropology.
SOAN 820 Professional Development
This course is designed as a seminar in which guest speakers orally present the results of their work and practical information on various professional skills (professionalization). Students are exposed to a variety of research conducted in the two disciplines and acquire communication and teaching skills necessary for working in the real world (defined as both academic and non-academic). Students learn how to present research results to a variety of audiences, how to address issues related to university teaching, and how to deal with ethical issues in the research context. The course is graded as Pass/Fail. It is mandatory for all students in the program. Each week, students must submit a written report on the presentation of the previous week.
SOAN 840 General Seminar
Designed as a preparation to the research involved in the thesis, the second general seminar focuses on the development of writing and research capacities, preparing research proposals, addressing issues in theory and method in relation to various topics, covering literature reviews. One faculty member is responsible for this seminar.
SOAN 850 Comprehensive Exam l (6 credits)
SOAN 860 Comprehensive Exam ll (6 credits)
Towards the end of their first year in the program, and in consultation with their thesis supervisor, PhD students form an advisory committee of three faculty members, including their supervisor, to assist in the preparation of the comprehensive exams (6 credits each). A core reading list consists of approximately 25 titles for each exam. The ultimate goal of the exams is to establish a candidate’s academic specialization. After completing the exams, students should have acquired sufficient background to teach a course and/or conduct advanced research in the area.
The examinations normally take place before the end of the student’s second year in the program. Each exam takes the form of a written essay (20-25 pages) that the student has three weeks to write. The student’s advisory committee members evaluate the exam as earning a grade of pass or fail. To constitute a successful exam, it must receive a grade of pass from all three members of the committee. Students who fail one of these exams are allowed to take it for a second time during the following term. A second failure leads to the student’s withdrawal from the program.
SOAN 870 Thesis Proposal
A candidate who has successfully completed the course requirements and the comprehensive exams must submit a thesis proposal to the Graduate Program Director and the thesis committee. The thesis committee, selected in consultation with the GPD, is composed of three members representing both Sociology and Anthropology. It may be the student’s initial advisory committee. The thesis proposal should describe the topic of the thesis, situate it in the relevant literature, and discuss the intended research methods. The written version of the proposal is approved by the members of the thesis committee and followed by an oral defense before the committee members. Following this, the PhD candidate is invited to present his thesis proposal in a departmental seminar.
SOAN 890 Thesis (57 credits)
Doctoral candidates submit a thesis based on their research and defend it in an oral examination. The thesis is expected to make an original contribution to knowledge, to be based on primary sources and to be presented in an acceptable form. The thesis should normally be no more than 400 pages in length (or equivalent if a non-literary format is used).
ANTH 691 Fieldwork: Stage (6 credits)
The fieldwork requirement, which may last from 3-4 months, involves undertaking research in a community which differs in important respects from the student’s community of reference, and collecting ethnographic data. This research forms the basis of the student’s thesis.
ANTH 692 Thesis (18 credits)
The thesis is required to demonstrate that the student has been able to carry out independent field research. It should be a work of near publishable quality. The thesis is evaluated by the student’s Thesis Committee and one other faculty member. The student is also required to defend the thesis orally before the above-mentioned examiners.
ANTH 693 Essay Proposal
Students develop a research proposal under the direction of their supervisor, including a preliminary reading list.
ANTH 694 Bibliographic Research (6 credits)
Students spend two to three months reviewing the literature (which may include both academic and grey literature sources) on their proposed topic. The review forms the basis of the students' essay.
ANTH 695 Essay (15 credits)
The essay is written under the supervision of one faculty member and is evaluated by two faculty members, including the supervisor. It can either be a literature review of a substantive nature, or a report on empirical research. Students are expected to submit work of publishable or near publishable quality. The appropriate length of the essay is approximately 40 pages.
* Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course provided that the course content has changed.
SOCI 691 Thesis (21 credits)
Students enrolled in the thesis option are required to demonstrate their ability to carry out independent research which reflects a scientific approach. The thesis proposal, SOCI 690 (prepared within the confines of the thesis tutorial) will serve as the basis for the elaboration of the actual thesis, SOCI 691. This will take the form of a written thesis (21 credits) of at least article length. The student will then orally defend the thesis before an examining committee. The thesis may be written in either English or French.
SOCI 695 Essay (18 credits)
The essay is written under the supervision of one faculty member and is evaluated by two faculty members, including the supervisor. It can either be a literature review of a substantive nature, or a report on empirical research. Students are expected to submit work of publishable or near publishable quality. The appropriate length of the essay is approximately 40 pages.
Selected Topics
The offerings for the following courses will be reviewed each year in light of the interest of students and faculty members. Five elective courses are offered each academic year from the list given below. Courses numbered “700” are advanced studies and normally will be conducted on a tutorial basis. The corresponding 600-level course is a prerequisite to the 700-level course. All courses listed below are worth 3 credits unless otherwise noted.
SOCI 620/720 Population and Society
SOCI 622/722 Studies in Race and Ethnicity
SOCI 625/725 Sociology of Culture
SOCI 626/726 North American Societies
SOCI 627/727 Social Movements and Social Change
SOCI 632/732 Sociology of the Family
SOCI 633/733 Sociology of Knowledge
SOCI 635/735 Gender Studies
SOCI 637/737 Development
SOCI 638/738 The City
SOCI 639/739 Social Problems
SOCI 640/740 Community Studies
SOCI 642/742 Studies in Governance
SOCI 644/744 Sociology of the Body
SOCI 645/745 Sociology of Men
SOCI 646/746 Globalization
SOCI 647/747 Democracy and Citizenship
SOCI 648/748 Health, Illness and Medicine
SOCI 649/749 Media and Communication
SOCI 652/752 Self and Subjectivity
SOCI 653/753 Intellectual Biography
Additional Topics, Thesis, and Essay
SOCI 601 Topics in Advanced Theory
SOCI 611 Topics in Advanced Methodology
SOCI 650/750 Special Topic in Sociology I
SOCI 651/751 Special Topic in Sociology II
SOCI 691 Thesis (21 credits)
SOCI 695 Essay (18 credits)
THEO 603 Method in Theology (3 credits), THEO 604 Theological Hermeneutics (3 credits), THEO 605 Methods in Biblical Studies (3 credits), THEO 690 Annotated Bibilography and Thesis Proposal (6 credits).
Electives: 9 credits from THEO 620-675.
Thesis: THEO 697 Thesis (21 credits).
Option B: MA with Applied Project in Theology
Required courses: THEO 603 Method in Theology (3 credits), THEO 604 Theological Hermeneutics (3 credits), THEO 605 Methods in Biblical Studies (3 credits).
Electives: 18 credits from THEO 620-675.
Research: THEO 691 Research Paper (9 credits), THEO 692 Applied Project in Theology (9 credits).
Courses
The required THEO 603 and THEO 605 will be offered in alternate years. THEO 604 will be offered every two years or as needed.
The courses offered are one-term, 3-credit courses unless otherwise indicated. A list designating which specific courses are to be offered in any given year, with description of content, will be compiled and distributed prior to registration.
Topic Courses
Topics in Scripture
THEO 621 Old Testament I
THEO 623 Old Testament II
THEO 627 Questions in Old Testament Research
THEO 629 Intertestament Studies
THEO 631 New Testament I
THEO 633 New Testament II
THEO 635 New Testament III
THEO 637 Questions in New Testament Research
THEO 639 Biblical Studies
Topics in Church History
THEO 641 History I
THEO 643 History II
THEO 645 History III
THEO 647 Research in History of Christian Thought
THEO 649 Questions in Christian Worship
Topics in Theology
THEO 651 Theology I
THEO 653 Theology II
THEO 655 Theology III
THEO 657 Questions in Theological Research
THEO 661 Ecclesiology I
THEO 663 Ecclesiology II
THEO 664 Ecclesiology III
THEO 667 Research In Ecclesiology
THEO 669 Theology & World Religions
Topics in Christian Ethics
THEO 671 Ethics I
THEO 673 Ethics II
THEO 675 Issues in Ethical Research
THEO 603 Method in Theology (3 credits)
This course introduces students to theological method: the questions, insights, and philosophical presuppositions that determine theological frameworks with some attention to modern systematic theology and Christian ethics. Students acquire a differentiated appreciation for the types of theology, the scope of distinct theological fields, and their research horizons.
THEO 604 Theological Hermeneutics (3 credits)
This course introduces students to the notion of church as interpretative community, and to experience diverse ways of utilizing this notion. Students develop an understanding of the basic principles of theological hermeneutics (the science or theory of interpretation), including a survey of the history of the disciple from early times up to present day.
THEO 605 Methods in Biblical Studies (3 credits)
This course focuses on tools and methods employed in biblical studies and ancient literature related to the Bible (up to 600 CE). Synchronic and diachronic approaches are discussed but the course focuses primarily on diachronic methods (form and genre criticism, comparative method, etc.) Students are trained to develop skills in analyzing texts using biblical methods.
THEO 690 Annotated Bibliography and Thesis Proposal (6 credits)
The annotated bibliography and thesis proposal constitute preliminary phases necessary for the writing of the MA thesis. The annotated bibliography and thesis proposal are supervised by the supervisor of the thesis and are assessed on a pass/fail basis.
Note: Students who have received credit for THEO 685 or 695 may not take this course for credit.
THEO 691 Research Paper (9 credits)
The guided research project involves the preparation of a substantial research paper. It may be prepared in conjunction with any seminar course but will be separate from the basic course requirements.
THEO 692 Applied Project in Theology (9 credits)
The aim of this course is to give the student the opportunity to engage in critical theological reflection by frequenting a milieu where theological interpretation occurs on a regular basis (e.g. a local parish, a confessional school, a religious formation program like the Christian Training Program, religious programming in the media, etc.) in order to assess the theological models presupposed in the activity studied. The practicum will include a 3 credit reading component related to the field of study.
THEO 697 Thesis (21 credits)
The thesis shall consist in the presentation of the research results. Each thesis shall be examined by a committee consisting of the student’s supervisor and by at least two other scholars from the Department. The remaining regulations concerning the thesis examination are in accordance with the School of Graduate Studies (See Thesis Regulations).
Cognate Courses
With permission of the Graduate Program Director up to 6 credits may be chosen from graduate offerings in other Departments at Concordia or other universities. Permission of the graduate director of the respective program must also be granted.
ENGR 6971 Project and Report I (4 credits). The purpose of the project report is to provide students in the MEng program with an opportunity to carry out independent project work and to present it in an acceptable form. The project may consist of the following:
A theoretical study of an engineering problem.
A design and/or development project conducted at Concordia.
A design and/or project conducted as part of the student’s full-time employment, providing the student’s employer furnishes written approval for the pursuit and reporting of the project.
An ordered and critical exposition of the literature on an appropriate topic in engineering.
Before registration for a project course, a student must obtain written consent of a faculty member who will act as advisor for the report. A form for this consent is available in the Office of the Dean of Engineering and Computer Science.
A four-credit report is due on the last day of classes of the term (fall, winter, summer) in which it is registered. Students are expected to have a preliminary version of their report approved by their advisor before its final submission. On or before the submission deadline, students must submit three copies of the report to their advisors, who will grade the report. One copy of the report will be returned to the students, one retained by the advisors, and one by the department.
The report, including an abstract, must be suitably documented and illustrated, should be at least 5000 words in length, must be typewritten on one side of 21.5 cm by 28 cm white paper of quality, and must be enclosed in binding. Students are referred to Form and Style: Thesis, Report, Term Papers, fourth edition by Campbell and Ballou, published by Houghton Migglin.
ENGR 6981 Project and Report II (4 credits)
ENGR 6991 Project and Report III (5 credits)
With the permission of their Department, students in the MEng Program may register for these project courses if they wish to carry out a more extended project, or if they wish to complete further projects. Each project course requires prior approval by the faculty member who has accepted to supervise the work. Students working on a multi-course project must register for the corresponding project courses in successive terms. For ENGR 6991 and multi-course projects, the report is due on the last day of classes of the last term in which they are registered. In the case of ENGR 6991 and multi-course project, three copies of the report must be submitted to the advisor on or before this deadline, and students are also required to make an oral presentation to the evaluators, and other members of the community. The report will be evaluated by the advisor and at least one other Engineering and Computer Science member of the Gina Cody School.
Industrial Experience Option in the Master of Engineering
Applicants to the Master of Engineering may apply to the Industrial Experience option in the industrial milieu through the Institute for Co-operative Education. Students should indicate their choice on the application form. The Institute for Co-operative Education will help them with resumes, cover letters and interview techniques. The suggested schedule is as follows: fall and winter terms will be dedicated to course work followed by one term in industry, culminating with two terms in University for the remaining course work. The industrial experience term will be noted on the student transcript/record.
Students apply to the Industrial Experience option as early as possible, preferably when they enter the program. It is preferable to be bilingual in French and English if they wish to work in Quebec. Students who lack good language skills and still want to be part of the program should improve their language skills prior to final acceptance.
Admission Criteria
Students need to be enrolled in the Industrial Experience option at least the semester before going on a work term. They begin applying for jobs the semester prior to the work term. Previous work experience cannot be used toward credit for the ENCS 6931. Students should have good grades (greater than a CGPA of 3.40) for the master’s program, be full-time and have good communication skills. A Canadian work permit is required. The Departmental Co-op Program Director will recommend final acceptance to the Industrial Experience option.
ENCS 6931 Industrial Stage and Training (9 credits)
Prerequisite: Completion of at least twenty credits in the program and permission of the Departmental Co-op Program Director.
This is an integral component of the Industrial Experience option that is to be completed under the supervision of an experienced engineer/computer scientist in the facilities of a participating company (a Canadian work permit is required).
Each student receives an assessment from the Departmental Co-op Program Director in consultation with the industry supervisor and the faculty advisor. Grading is on a pass/fail basis based on a proposal, monthly progress reports, a final report and a presentation.
Top
ENGR 6971 Project and Report I (4 credits). The purpose of the project report is to provide students in the MEng program with an opportunity to carry out independent project work and to present it in an acceptable form. The project may consist of the following:
A theoretical study of an engineering problem.
A design and/or development project conducted at Concordia.
A design and/or project conducted as part of the student’s full-time employment, providing the student’s employer furnishes written approval for the pursuit and reporting of the project.
An ordered and critical exposition of the literature on an appropriate topic in engineering.
Before registration for a project course, a student must obtain written consent of a faculty member who will act as advisor for the report. A form for this consent is available in the Office of the Dean of Engineering and Computer Science.
A four-credit report is due on the last day of classes of the term (fall, winter, summer) in which it is registered. Students are expected to have a preliminary version of their report approved by their advisor before its final submission. On or before the submission deadline, students must submit three copies of the report to their advisors, who will grade the report. One copy of the report will be returned to the students, one retained by the advisors, and one by the department.
The report, including an abstract, must be suitably documented and illustrated, should be at least 5000 words in length, must be typewritten on one side of 21.5 cm by 28 cm white paper of quality, and must be enclosed in binding. Students are referred to Form and Style: Thesis, Report, Term Papers, fourth edition by Campbell and Ballou, published by Houghton Migglin.
ENGR 6981 Project and Report II (4 credits)
ENGR 6991 Project and Report III (5 credits)
With the permission of their Department, students in the MEng Program may register for these project courses if they wish to carry out a more extended project, or if they wish to complete further projects. Each project course requires prior approval by the faculty member who has accepted to supervise the work. Students working on a multi-course project must register for the corresponding project courses in successive terms. For ENGR 6991 and multi-course projects, the report is due on the last day of classes of the last term in which they are registered. In the case of ENGR 6991 and multi-course project, three copies of the report must be submitted to the advisor on or before this deadline, and students are also required to make an oral presentation to the evaluators, and other members of the community. The report will be evaluated by the advisor and at least one other Engineering and Computer Science member of the Gina Cody School.
Industrial Experience Option in the Master of Engineering
Applicants to the Master of Engineering may apply to the Industrial Experience option in the industrial milieu through the Institute for Co-operative Education. Students should indicate their choice on the application form. The Institute for Co-operative Education will help them with resumes, cover letters and interview techniques. The suggested schedule is as follows: fall and winter terms will be dedicated to course work followed by one term in industry, culminating with two terms in University for the remaining course work. The industrial experience term will be noted on the student transcript/record.
Students apply to the Industrial Experience option as early as possible, preferably when they enter the program. It is preferable to be bilingual in French and English if they wish to work in Quebec. Students who lack good language skills and still want to be part of the program should improve their language skills prior to final acceptance.
Admission Criteria
Students need to be enrolled in the Industrial Experience option at least the semester before going on a work term. They begin applying for jobs the semester prior to the work term. Previous work experience cannot be used toward credit for the ENCS 6931. Students should have good grades (greater than a CGPA of 3.40) for the master’s program, be full-time and have good communication skills. A Canadian work permit is required. The Departmental Co-op Program Director will recommend final acceptance to the Industrial Experience option.
ENCS 6931 Industrial Stage and Training (9 credits)
Prerequisite: Completion of at least twenty credits in the program and permission of the Departmental Co-op Program Director.
This is an integral component of the Industrial Experience option that is to be completed under the supervision of an experienced engineer/computer scientist in the facilities of a participating company (a Canadian work permit is required).
Each student receives an assessment from the Departmental Co-op Program Director in consultation with the industry supervisor and the faculty advisor. Grading is on a pass/fail basis based on a proposal, monthly progress reports, a final report and a presentation.
Top
ENGR 6971 Project and Report I (4 credits). The purpose of the project report is to provide students in the MEng program with an opportunity to carry out independent project work and to present it in an acceptable form. The project may consist of the following:
A theoretical study of an engineering problem.
A design and/or development project conducted at Concordia.
A design and/or project conducted as part of the student’s full-time employment, providing the student’s employer furnishes written approval for the pursuit and reporting of the project.
An ordered and critical exposition of the literature on an appropriate topic in engineering.
Before registration for a project course, a student must obtain written consent of a faculty member who will act as advisor for the report. A form for this consent is available in the Office of the Dean of Engineering and Computer Science.
A four-credit report is due on the last day of classes of the term (fall, winter, summer) in which it is registered. Students are expected to have a preliminary version of their report approved by their advisor before its final submission. On or before the submission deadline, students must submit three copies of the report to their advisors, who will grade the report. One copy of the report will be returned to the students, one retained by the advisors, and one by the department.
The report, including an abstract, must be suitably documented and illustrated, should be at least 5000 words in length, must be typewritten on one side of 21.5 cm by 28 cm white paper of quality, and must be enclosed in binding. Students are referred to Form and Style: Thesis, Report, Term Papers, fourth edition by Campbell and Ballou, published by Houghton Migglin.
ENGR 6981 Project and Report II (4 credits)
ENGR 6991 Project and Report III (5 credits)
With the permission of their Department, students in the MEng Program may register for these project courses if they wish to carry out a more extended project, or if they wish to complete further projects. Each project course requires prior approval by the faculty member who has accepted to supervise the work. Students working on a multi-course project must register for the corresponding project courses in successive terms. For ENGR 6991 and multi-course projects, the report is due on the last day of classes of the last term in which they are registered. In the case of ENGR 6991 and multi-course project, three copies of the report must be submitted to the advisor on or before this deadline, and students are also required to make an oral presentation to the evaluators, and other members of the community. The report will be evaluated by the advisor and at least one other Engineering and Computer Science member of the Gina Cody School.
Industrial Experience Option in the Master of Engineering
Applicants to the Master of Engineering may apply to the Industrial Experience option in the industrial milieu through the Institute for Co-operative Education. Students should indicate their choice on the application form. The Institute for Co-operative Education will help them with resumes, cover letters and interview techniques. The suggested schedule is as follows: fall and winter terms will be dedicated to course work followed by one term in industry, culminating with two terms in University for the remaining course work. The industrial experience term will be noted on the student transcript/record.
Students apply to the Industrial Experience option as early as possible, preferably when they enter the program. It is preferable to be bilingual in French and English if they wish to work in Quebec. Students who lack good language skills and still want to be part of the program should improve their language skills prior to final acceptance.
Admission Criteria
Students need to be enrolled in the Industrial Experience option at least the semester before going on a work term. They begin applying for jobs the semester prior to the work term. Previous work experience cannot be used toward credit for the ENCS 6931. Students should have good grades (greater than a CGPA of 3.40) for the master’s program, be full-time and have good communication skills. A Canadian work permit is required. The Departmental Co-op Program Director will recommend final acceptance to the Industrial Experience option.
ENCS 6931 Industrial Stage and Training (9 credits)
Prerequisite: Completion of at least twenty credits in the program and permission of the Departmental Co-op Program Director.
This is an integral component of the Industrial Experience option that is to be completed under the supervision of an experienced engineer/computer scientist in the facilities of a participating company (a Canadian work permit is required).
Each student receives an assessment from the Departmental Co-op Program Director in consultation with the industry supervisor and the faculty advisor. Grading is on a pass/fail basis based on a proposal, monthly progress reports, a final report and a presentation.
Top
ENGR 6971 Project and Report I (4 credits). The purpose of the project report is to provide students in the MEng program with an opportunity to carry out independent project work and to present it in an acceptable form. The project may consist of the following:
A theoretical study of an engineering problem.
A design and/or development project conducted at Concordia.
A design and/or project conducted as part of the student’s full-time employment, providing the student’s employer furnishes written approval for the pursuit and reporting of the project.
An ordered and critical exposition of the literature on an appropriate topic in engineering.
Before registration for a project course, a student must obtain written consent of a faculty member who will act as advisor for the report. A form for this consent is available in the Office of the Dean of Engineering and Computer Science.
A four-credit report is due on the last day of classes of the term (fall, winter, summer) in which it is registered. Students are expected to have a preliminary version of their report approved by their advisor before its final submission. On or before the submission deadline, students must submit three copies of the report to their advisors, who will grade the report. One copy of the report will be returned to the students, one retained by the advisors, and one by the department.
The report, including an abstract, must be suitably documented and illustrated, should be at least 5000 words in length, must be typewritten on one side of 21.5 cm by 28 cm white paper of quality, and must be enclosed in binding. Students are referred to Form and Style: Thesis, Report, Term Papers, fourth edition by Campbell and Ballou, published by Houghton Migglin.
ENGR 6981 Project and Report II (4 credits)
ENGR 6991 Project and Report III (5 credits)
With the permission of their Department, students in the MEng Program may register for these project courses if they wish to carry out a more extended project, or if they wish to complete further projects. Each project course requires prior approval by the faculty member who has accepted to supervise the work. Students working on a multi-course project must register for the corresponding project courses in successive terms. For ENGR 6991 and multi-course projects, the report is due on the last day of classes of the last term in which they are registered. In the case of ENGR 6991 and multi-course project, three copies of the report must be submitted to the advisor on or before this deadline, and students are also required to make an oral presentation to the evaluators, and other members of the community. The report will be evaluated by the advisor and at least one other Engineering and Computer Science member of the Gina Cody School.
Industrial Experience Option in the Master of Engineering
Applicants to the Master of Engineering may apply to the Industrial Experience option in the industrial milieu through the Institute for Co-operative Education. Students should indicate their choice on the application form. The Institute for Co-operative Education will help them with resumes, cover letters and interview techniques. The suggested schedule is as follows: fall and winter terms will be dedicated to course work followed by one term in industry, culminating with two terms in University for the remaining course work. The industrial experience term will be noted on the student transcript/record.
Students apply to the Industrial Experience option as early as possible, preferably when they enter the program. It is preferable to be bilingual in French and English if they wish to work in Quebec. Students who lack good language skills and still want to be part of the program should improve their language skills prior to final acceptance.
Admission Criteria
Students need to be enrolled in the Industrial Experience option at least the semester before going on a work term. They begin applying for jobs the semester prior to the work term. Previous work experience cannot be used toward credit for the ENCS 6931. Students should have good grades (greater than a CGPA of 3.40) for the master’s program, be full-time and have good communication skills. A Canadian work permit is required. The Departmental Co-op Program Director will recommend final acceptance to the Industrial Experience option.
ENCS 6931 Industrial Stage and Training (9 credits)
Prerequisite: Completion of at least twenty credits in the program and permission of the Departmental Co-op Program Director.
This is an integral component of the Industrial Experience option that is to be completed under the supervision of an experienced engineer/computer scientist in the facilities of a participating company (a Canadian work permit is required).
Each student receives an assessment from the Departmental Co-op Program Director in consultation with the industry supervisor and the faculty advisor. Grading is on a pass/fail basis based on a proposal, monthly progress reports, a final report and a presentation.
Top
CIVI 7901 Environmental Engineering Research Project (9 credits): The proposed topic for the project must be selected in consultation with a faculty supervisor. The Environmental Engineering Research project report will be evaluated by two faculty members from the Department.
A minimum of 12 credits chosen from those Course Groups of List B other than the group chosen in (1) above. These groups of courses could include special program courses put on for or by a given industry in conjunction with the Gina Cody School.
A maximum of 4 credits chosen from the Engineering Courses section, which include E72 (MBA courses).
List B: Course Groups in Environmental Engineering Program
Group 1 - Environmental Engineering and Water Resources:
Topic Areas: E33, E36, E37
Group 2 - Geotechnical and Transportation Engineering:
Topic Areas: E03, E34, E35
Group 3 - Structural Engineering:
Topic Areas: E06, E31, E32
Group 4 - Construction Engineering and Management:
Topic Areas: E21, E24
MECH 6961 Aerospace Case Study I (3 credits)
MECH 6971 Aerospace Case Study II (3 credits)
ENGR 7961 Industrial Stage and Training (6 credits)
Prerequisite: Completion of at least twelve credits in the composite option and at least twenty-one credits in the aerospace program or permission of program director.
This is an integral component of the aerospace program and the composites option in the Mechanical Engineering program that is to be completed under the supervision of an experienced engineer in the facilities of a participating company (Canadian work permit is required). The topic is to be decided by a mutual agreement between the student, the participating company and the program director. The course is graded on the basis of the student’s performance during the work period, which includes a technical report.
There may be some restrictions placed on students chosen for the industry sponsored “stage”. For those students who are unable to obtain an industrial stage, it is possible to take ENGR 7961 for a project carried out at the university. Such students must obtain the approval of the program director.
Career Prospects. In Montreal, graduates have found work in companies such as Pratt & Whitney Canada, Bell Helicopter, CAE Electronics, Bombardier Aerospace, and others. They hold positions as varied as consulting engineers, aircraft designers, manufacturing plant managers, vice presidents, and chief executive officers. Some have also gone on to form their own companies, while others have taken jobs across Canada and abroad. A number of our graduates hold teaching positions in several universities across North America and in other countries.
ENGR 8901 Master of Applied Science Research and Thesis (29 credits)
ENGR 8911 Doctoral Research and Thesis
INSE 8901 Master of Applied Science Research and Thesis (25 credits)
E63 - PROJECT, REPORT AND INDUSTRIAL TRAINING
ENCS 6931 Industrial Stage and Training
ELEC 6961 Graduate Seminar in Electrical and Computer Engineering
INSE 6961 Graduate Seminar in Information and Systems Engineering
ENGR 692 Case Study and Report
ENGR 6971 Project and Report I
ENGR 6981 Project and Report II
ENGR 6991 Project and Report III
INDU 6990 Industrial Engineering Capstone
INDU 6991 Engineering Management Industrial Stage I
INDU 6992 Engineering Management Industrial Stage II
E66 - SYSTEMS ENGINEERING
INSE 6311 Sustainable Infrastructure Planning and Management Systems
INSE 6400 Principles of Systems Engineering
INSE 6411 Product Design Theory and Methodology
INSE 6421 Systems Integration and Testing
INSE 6431 Ad Hoc Wireless Networks: Architectures and Protocols
E67 - 3D GRAPHICS AND INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
INSE 6510 Video Game Technology and Development
INSE 6530 3D Graphics and Computer Animation for Game Design
E68 - QUALITY SYSTEMS ENGINEERING
INSE 6210 Total Quality Methodologies in Engineering
INSE 6220 Advanced Statistical Approaches to Quality
INSE 6230 Total Quality Project Management
INSE 6240 Executive Communication
INSE 6250 Quality Methodologies for Software
INSE 6260 Software Quality Assurance
INSE 6270 Quality-Based Systems Engineering
INSE 6280 Quality Assurance for Systems Engineering
INSE 6290 Quality in Supply Chain Design
INSE 6300 Quality Assurance in Supply Chain Management
INSE 6310 Systems Engineering Maintenance Management
E69 - INFORMATION SYSTEMS SECURITY
INSE 6110 Foundations of Cryptography
INSE 6120 Crypto-Protocol and Network Security
INSE 6130 Operating Systems Security
INSE 6140 Malware Defenses and Application Security
INSE 6150 Security Evaluation Methodologies
INSE 6160 Database Security and Privacy
INSE 6170 Network Security Architecture and Management
INSE 6180 Security and Privacy Implications of Data Mining
INSE 6190 Wireless Network Security
INSE 6610 Cybercrime Investigations
INSE 6620 Cloud Computing Security and Privacy
INSE 6630 Recent Developments in Information Systems Security
INSE 6640 Smart Grids and Control System Security
INSE 6650 Trusted Computing
INSE 6660 Secure Programming
INSE 6670 Embedded Systems Security
INSE 6680 Systems Physical Security
E70 - INFORMATION SYSTEMS ENGINEERING
INSE 6100 Advanced Java Platforms
INSE 6320 Risk Analysis for Information and Systems Engineering
INSE 6441 Applied Game Theory and Mechanism Design
INSE 7100 Design and Analysis of Security Protocols
INSE 7110 Value Added Service Engineering in Next Generation Networks
INSE 7120 Advanced Network Management
E71 - COMPUTER SCIENCE
See courses listed for Topic Areas C01 to C07 in Computer Science and Software Engineering Section.
E72 - BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION PROGRAM
MBA 607 Financial Accounting for Managerial Decisions
MBA 608 Managerial Statistics
MBA 614 Financial Management
MBA 616 Operations Management
MBA 628 Management Accounting
E73 - SOFTWARE ENGINEERING
See courses listed for Topic Areas C08 to C13 in Computer Science and Software Engineering Section.
F03 - APPLICATION SPECIFIC INTEGRATED CIRCUITS
COEN 6501 Digital System Design and Synthesis
COEN 6511 VLSI Circuit Design
COEN 6521 Design for Testability
COEN 6531 ASIC Synthesis
COEN 6541 Functional Hardware Verification
COEN 6551 Formal Hardware Verification
ELEC 6051 Introduction to Analog VLSI
ELEC 6071 Mixed-Signal VLSI for Communication Systems (*)
ELEC 6081 Modern Analog Filter Design
(*) Cross-listed courses
(***) Available only to students admitted prior to September 1997.
(****) Students admitted prior to September 1997 are not allowed to substitute ENCS 8011 for an equivalent course work.
Course Descriptions
Building Engineering
BCEE 6961 Graduate Seminar in Building and Civil Engineering (1 credit)
MEng students must attend a set of seminars identified by the Department and submit a comprehensive report on selected topics. The report, including an abstract, must be suitably documented and illustrated, should be at least 1000 words in length, must be type-written on one side of 21.5 cm by 28 cm white paper of quality, and must be enclosed in binding. Students are referred to Form and Style: Thesis, Reports, Term Papers, fourth edition by Campbell and Ballou, published by Houghton Mifflin.
Note: This course cannot be taken by MASc or PhD students.
BLDG 6061 Structural Systems for Buildings (4 credits)
Building components and assembled systems. Structural efficiency and economy: rigid frames, shear walls, framed tube, latticed structures; membrane, air and cable supported structures. Selection and preliminary design of building structural systems, materials and components. Case studies.
BLDG 6071 Wind Engineering and Building Aerodynamics (4 credits)
Atmospheric circulations; atmospheric boundary layer; wind structure; wind speed and turbulence measurements; bluff body aerodynamics; mean and fluctuating wind forces on buildings; internal wind pressures; along-wind, across-wind and torsional building response to wind; snow drifting and accumulation problems; dispersion of gaseous pollutants. A case study or a project is required.
BLDG 6111 Computer-Aided Building Operation (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 6711.
Computer systems for energy management, including scheduling and operation of HVAC systems and lighting. Applications for intelligent buildings. Use of simulation and knowledge-based software for automatic regulation of building operation. Diagnosis of malfunctions and modifications of operations. Computerized building security systems. Actions during extraordinary conditions such as fire emergencies. A project is required.
BLDG 6151 Database Applications in Building and Civil Engineering (4 credits)
Components, properties and limits of databases and database management systems (DBMS). Database requirements for engineering tasks. Design of database schema and implementation in commercially available DBMS. Engineering data modelling techniques. Topics include: the entity/relationship model; the relational data model; the standard database language SQL; and the object-oriented data model. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken ENGR 6151 may not take this course for credit.
BLDG 6221 Design of Computer-Aided Systems in Building and Civil Engineering (4 credits)
Object-oriented modelling of physical components, design objectives, performance requirements and engineering processes. Identification of objects and definition of their arrangement and interaction to model engineering processes. Overview of the life-cycle of an engineering software project. Project on implementation of a small scale computer-aided engineering system.
Note: Students who have taken ENGR 6221 may not take this course for credit.
BLDG 6231 Applications of Artificial Intelligence in Building and Civil Engineering (4 credits)
Introduction to artificial intelligence techniques in an engineering context; heuristic search methods, logical reasoning, knowledge-based systems, neural networks, genetics algorithms, and case-based reasoning. Algorithmic versus knowledge-based programming for engineering applications. Emphasis on knowledge-based systems and their characteristics, capabilities and limitations. Case studies in design, failure diagnosis and processing of standards. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken ENGR 6231 may not take this course for credit.
BLDG 6241 Building Information Modelling in Construction (4 credits)
Topics include introduction to Building Information Modelling (BIM) technologies; BIM implementation at different project stages - pre-construction, construction, and facility management; BIM-Aided design alternatives, constructability analysis, and development of space-time-cost models; BIM visualization for trade coordination and processes monitoring. A project is required.
BLDG 6541 Heat Transfer (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the Bachelor of/Baccalaureate in Engineering (Building) Program).
Steady state heat conduction. Convection and radiation heat exchange. Refrigeration cycles. Theory of air vapour mixtures. Introduction to heat transfer in building environment. Unsteady state of heat transfer. Case studies.
BLDG 6561 Building Economics I (*) (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the Bachelor of/Baccalaureate in Engineering (Building) Program).
Development of economic performance measures of interest to developers, owners, contractors and users. Sources of finance and the determinants of the cost of money. Elementary estimating; cost indices; forecasting techniques; value of money; economic comparison techniques; evaluation of projects in private and public sectors; tax regulations; inflation; life-cycle costing; risk analysis; non-economic attributes. Case studies of economic analysis of projects, single building and building components. A project is required.
BLDG 6571 Project Management (4 credits)
Introduction to managing the development, design and construction of buildings. Examination of project management for the total development process, including inter-relationships between owners, developers, financing sources, designers, contractors and users; methods of project delivery; introduction to planning and scheduling; role and tasks of the project manager; feasibility analyses; construction claims; financing and cash-flow analysis; government regulations; environmental and social constraints; introduction to control of cost, time and technical performance; human factors; computer applications. A project is required.
BLDG 6581 Decision Analysis (4 credits)
Development of a basic theory of decision making under uncertainty. Rationales of decision makers, utility, the concept of the value of perfect information. The Bayesian approach to decision making; pre-posterior analysis and optimal fixed-sized analysis for random processes. Decision analysis with multiple objective, structuring the problem, multi-attributed utility functions, case studies. A project is required.
BLDG 6591 Computer-Aided Building Design (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisites: BLDG 6561.
Identification of objectives, decision variables, processes and information flow in building design. Application and evaluation of computer systems to components of the building design process. Determination of decision variables in problem modelling and sensitivity of results. Current applications in structural analysis and design, space layout, electrical distribution systems, HVAC design, lighting design, estimating, specification editing and scheduling. Evaluation of issues of interdisciplinary information control and interchange. A project is required.
BLDG 6601 Building Enclosure (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent).
Prerequisite: BLDG 6611.
Schematic and detail design of walls, windows and roofs. Complex building types will be examined to show the relationships between massing, materials, energy conservation and building use. Solar shading, daylighting, rainscreen and air barrier principles will be emphasized. A project is required.
BLDG 6611 Building Science (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the Bachelor of/Baccalaureate in Engineering (Building) Program).
Environmental exterior and interior influences on inner environmental control. Topics include: thermal energy exchanges, psychrometrics, vapour and fluid flow, air leakage, ventilation and design comfort conditions, selection of materials and building systems. A case study or a project is required.
BLDG 6621 Modern Building Materials (*) (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent).
Prerequisite: BLDG 6611 previously or concurrently.
Structural, thermal and acoustical properties of new building materials such as: plastics, synthetic fibres, adhesives, sealants, caulking compounds, forams, sandwich panels, composites, polymer-concrete systems, fibre-reinforced concretes, plastic mortars, polymers for flooring, roofing, synthetic wall papers. Consideration of corrosion, bio- and thermal degradation, stability under ultraviolet and solar radiation. A project is required.
BLDG 6631 Fundamentals of Facility Management (4 credits)
Systems approach to planning, organization and implementation of a facility, including space allocation, leasing and marketing, operation, maintenance, and renovation over the life of the building. Forecast of budget requirements for effective operation, maintenance, and renovation. Correlation between the operation of the building and health risks, comfort, productivity, and costs. Integrated approach to the planning, analysis, evaluation, organization and optimization of physical systems of facilities. Case studies.
BLDG 6641 Industrialized Building (4 credits)
Trends toward off-site fabrication of buildings. Needs and technical requirements of international markets. Principal types of industrialized systems, materials and components. Optimization of industrialized production. Planning, design, construction and maintenance. Codes and standards. A case study and project.
BLDG 6651 Fire and Smoke Control in Buildings (*) (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent).
Prerequisite: BLDG 6611.
Topics treated include: fire and smoke control; failure mechanisms of building enclosure, illustrated by case studies; performance codes for enclosure systems; enclosure design for extreme operation environments. A project is required.
BLDG 6661 Hydrothermal Performance of the Building Envelope (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 6611 previously or concurrently.
Modelling of dynamic building envelope thermal performance. Thermal bridges. Modelling of transient moisture transfer, condensation and accumulation. Advanced glazings and evaluation of window performance. Active building envelope components for heat and moisture control. Experimental techniques for performance evaluation of the building envelope; infrared thermography, guarded hot box and calibrated hot box tests. A project is required.
BLDG 6671 Diagnostics and Rehabilitation of Building Envelope (4 credits)
Failures in building envelopes. Modes of deterioration including freeze-thaw, chemical, movements. Diagnostics and investigation techniques including field survey instruments. Assessment of intervention magnitude and performance of proposed solutions. Codes, standards and regulations. Case studies.
BLDG 6701 Building Environment (4 credits)
Design criteria of indoor environment. Assessment of thermal comfort and sensation. Mathematical models of thermal comfort: predictive models and adaptive models. Prediction of thermal sensation using: computer simulation, and measurements with thermal comfort meter. Verification of compliance with standards. Visual comfort. Standards for quality of visual environment. Calculation of photometric parameters. Preliminary design of the indoor lighting system. Evaluation of illuminance level using commercially available software packages. Acoustical comfort. Standards for quality of acoustical environment. Sound control measures through the design of buildings and HVAC systems. Two projects.
BLDG 6711 Mechanical Systems in Building (4 credits)
Co-requisite: BLDG 6701.
HVAC Systems. Analysis, selection and operation; design of air and water distribution systems in buildings; waste water disposal and sprinkler systems. A project is required.
BLDG 6721 Building Acoustics (*) (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent).
An understanding of sound and an examination of the major factors which contribute to a controlled acoustic environment in buildings. Topics covered include: basic vibration, sources, measurement and description of environmental noise, psychological and physiological aspects of sound perception; sound transmission through building elements; reverberation, measurement and control; and room acoustics. Case studies and a project are required.
BLDG 6731 Building Illumination (*) (4 credits)
Quantitative and qualitative aspects of illumination systems. Photometric quantities, visual perception and colour theory, standards, daylight and artificial illumination systems, radiative transfer. Fixture and lamp characteristics, control devices for improved energy efficiency. Design of advanced fenestration systems for daylighting. Field measurements and artificial sky tests. Virtual reality and other computer simulation techniques for lighting. A project is required.
BLDG 6741 HVAC Control Systems (4 credits)
HVAC control loops: classification and structure, specifications, hardware, tuning and testing. Optimization of single- and multi-loop control systems. Energy management systems for monitoring, control and diagnostics of HVAC system operation. A project is required.
BLDG 6751 Indoor Air Quality and Ventilation (*) (4 credits)
History and development of indoor air science. Relevant national and provincial standards and regulations. Principles of occupational hygiene; identification, evaluation and control of physical, biological, and chemical agents in indoor environment. Ventilation requirements. Definition of ventilation efficiency and removal effectiveness; measurement techniques and modelling. Indoor air monitoring; field studies of gases, fumes, solvents, and dusts. Plan for building walkthrough evaluations; strategies for improving indoor air quality. Building design for acceptable indoor air quality, material selection and specification. A case study or project.
BLDG 6761 Intelligent Buildings (4 credits)
Issues related to the Intelligent Building; automation, communication and security. Mechanical, electrical, electronic subsystems and their integration within the building; configuration and operational characteristics; performance specifications; analytical models; design methods; case studies. A project is required.
BLDG 6781 Energy Management in Buildings (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 6611 previously or concurrently.
Energy-related standards, codes and by-laws. Methods of assessment of the actual energy performance. Conventional and innovative measurement and analysis techniques. Energy-oriented renovation or replacement of building sub-systems (e.g. HVAC and lighting systems). Prediction of energy and cost savings using commercially available software packages. Verification of compliance with standards. Life cycle analysis. A case study and project.
BLDG 6791 Thermal Building Simulation (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 6611.
Mathematical models of heat and mass transfer phenomena through building components: transfer function methods and numerical methods. Models of radiative and convective heat transfer phenomena within buildings. Application to equipment-based modelling of HVAC systems: first principle models and correlation-based models. System-based modelling of HVAC systems. Validation of computer models. A project is required.
BLDG 6801 Construction Planning and Control (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 6571.
Methods of delivering construction. Contractual relationships and organizational structures. Phases of project development. Estimating resource requirements; costs and durations. Bidding strategies. Network analysis using CPM and PERT, time-cost trade-off, resource allocation. Cash flow analysis. Earned-value concept for integrated time and cost control. Quality control. Value engineering. A case study and project.
Note: Students who have taken the undergraduate equivalent BCEE 465 may not take this course for credit.
BLDG 6811 Labour and Industrial Relations in Construction (*) (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent).
The study of labour legislation with special emphasis on the construction industry, union organization, the theory and practice of negotiations, mediation, contract administration and arbitration. Review of actual contracts, discussion of future trends. Case studies.
BLDG 6821 Legal Issues in Construction (*) (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent).
Legal concepts and processes applicable to the development of constructed facilities and to the operation of the construction firm. Emphasis on Quebec law and institutions. Case studies.
BLDG 6831 Construction Processes (*) (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent).
A study of current construction methods and techniques. The subjects include wood framing, masonry, concrete forming, slipforming, precast construction, industrialized building, deep excavation shoring and underpinning. The methods are described in terms of materials involved, equipment required, current field practice and safety considerations. Case studies.
BLDG 6851 Project Cost Estimating (*) (4 credits)
Techniques and procedures used for estimating cost of construction projects. Topics include: cost estimation process; elements of project cost; conceptual and detailed cost estimation methods; risk assessment and range estimating; case studies; computer-aided estimating. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken the undergraduate equivalent BCEE 464 may not take this course for credit.
BLDG 6861 Simulations and Design of Construction Operations (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 6831.
Principles of modelling and simulation. Classification and validation of simulation models. Analysis of input data and outputs. Object Oriented Simulation (OOS). Simulation languages. Application of discrete event simulation in construction operations including earthmoving operations, building construction operations, and tunneling operations. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken the undergraduate equivalent BCEE 466 may not take this course for credit.
BLDG 691 Topics in Building Engineering I (4 credits)
Note: Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for these courses, providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. CIVI 691A, CIVI 691B, etc.
BLDG 6921 Trenchless Technology for Rehabilitation Works (4 credits)
State of Canadian urban infrastructure with a focus on underground facilities; current industry practice; common types of defects in underground pipes; diagnostics of defects and evaluation techniques for the conditions of water and sewer mains; planning, equipment, materials and methods for rehabilitation of water and sewer mains; case studies.
Note: Students who have taken ENGR 6721 may not take this course for credit.
BLDG 6931 Infrastructure Rehabilitation (4 credits)
State of Canadian urban infrastructure. Rehabilitation techniques as applicable to steel and concrete structures; degradation mechanisms; detection and classification of defects. Evaluation and assessment of the conditions of buildings and bridges. Rehabilitation materials and methods. Codes and guidelines. Case studies.
Note: Students who have taken ENGR 6731 may not take this course for credit.
BLDG 6951 Solar Building Modelling and Design (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 6611 or permission of instructor.
Design principles of solar buildings, including direct gain, indirect gain and solaria. Net-zero energy solar buildings; analytical and numerical models. Performance of glazing systems, transparent insulation, and airflow windows. Building-integrated photovoltaic systems. Thermal storage sizing for solar energy storage; phase-change thermal storage. Thermosyphon collectors. Prevention of overheating, shading systems and natural ventilation. A project is required.
BLDG 7401 Dispersion of Building Exhaust (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 6611.
Atmospheric parameters, wind velocity profiles, meteorological data. Gaussian dispersion equations. Plume rise and trajectories. Evaluation of stack gas plume dispersion. Trapped plumes; Turner’s approximation. Potential reingestion of building exhaust. Analytical, numerical and experimental modelling of dispersion process; design guidelines fumigation. A case study or a project is required.
BLDG 7511 Integrated Building Design (4 credits)
Prerequisites: BLDG 6601 and BLDG 6711.
Compatibility among building subsystems (structural, envelope, mechanical, lighting, materials) and between the building and the environment. Integration issues in the design, production and operation of the built facility. Case studies of failures caused by lack of compatibility. Consideration for tolerances and sustainable development. A project is required.
BLDG 7521 Advanced Computer-Aided Building Design (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 6231.
Characteristics of the building design process. Traditional versus emerging roles of computers pertaining to building design activities. Preliminary design and integrated design issues: analysis with incomplete/imprecise data, automatic sizing and checking based on Standards, interfaces between CAD and analysis routines, communications across disciplines and through design stages, standardization. Applications involving operations research techniques, KBS and analysis packages for engineering performance evaluation. A project is required.
BLDG 7601 Durability of Building Materials (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 6611 or equivalent.
Concepts underlying long-term performance of building materials such as: ceramics, stucco and synthetic stucco, lightweight concrete, wood and wood-based products, thermal insulation, selected composite materials, sealants, membranes used for waterproofing and air barriers. Methods of fabrication, properties and evaluation for durability. Failure mechanisms under combined actions of mechanical and environmental loads (temperature, moisture, freeze-thaw, solar radiation, salt solutions, air pollution, and microorganisms). A case study and project.
BLDG 7811 Project Acquisition and Control (4 credits)
Prerequisites: BLDG 6571, 6801.
Study of techniques and procedures used for construction project procurement and control. Topics treated include: marketing, bidding strategies, work break-down structure and contract packages, techniques for integrated time and cost control; management information systems for control, procurement; productivity measurement, contingency and escalation analysis and control. A project is required.
BLDG 7831 Building Economics II (4 credits)
Prerequisites: BLDG 6561, 6581.
Topics include: replacement analysis; risk analysis of projects; sensitivity analysis; forecasting techniques, profitability analysis; multi-attributed decision analysis, case studies. A project is required.
BLDG 7841 Information Technology Applications in Construction (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 7811.
Use of computers in estimating, cost engineering, scheduling and resource analyses, materials control, report generation and operations simulation. Information systems: information-based theories of management; information technology, cost and value information; analysis, design and implementation of a network based control system. Considerations for computer usage in construction firms; hardware, software, operations, economic, human and organizational. Product and process modelling; Internet use in product delivery. A project is required.
BLDG 7861 Business Practices in Construction (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 6801.
A study of business practices as they relate to the construction industry. Topics treated include: organization; marketing; bid preparation; bonding; personnel management; financing; accounting; cash-flow analysis; capital budgeting. The principles are first presented and then followed by case studies. A project is required.
BLDG 7871 Construction Equipment Management (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 6561.
The study of various classes of equipment, (cranes, excavators, loaders, tractors, etc.) used in construction. Methods are developed for selecting, acquiring, maintaining and replacing equipment. Treatment of simulation and its use for the optimal selection of equipment spreads. A project is required.
BLDG 791 Topics in Building Engineering II (4 credits)
Note: Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for these courses, providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. CIVI 691A, CIVI 691B, etc.
BLDG 8011 Doctoral Seminar in Building Engineering (***)
Grading on a pass/fail basis only. No credit value.
Civil Engineering
CIVI 6001 Advanced Reinforced Concrete (4 credits)
Strength limits; modes of failure; flexural and inclined cracking strength; crack propagation; crack width; deformation; biaxial and multiaxial strength of concrete; ultimate strength in flexure; ultimate strength in diagonal splitting; ultimate strength of columns; current research progress and modelling for finite element analysis; new code regulations. A project is required.
CIVI 6011 Pre-cast and Pre-stressed Concrete Structures (4 credits)
Prefabrication and prestressing concepts; segmental and modular structures and connections; composite and pre-and post-tensioned structures; analysis and design of determinate and indeterminate systems; design codes. A project is required.
CIVI 6021 Durability of Concrete Materials (4 credits)
Influence of constituent materials (cements, aggregates and admixtures) on the properties of fresh and hardened concrete. Chemistry and hydration reactions of cement and alternate cementing materials. Development of pore structure and its influence on transport and deterioration mechanisms, durability testing. Concrete mixture design and optimization for high performance and other speciality concrete types. Climatic loads affecting durability and performance. Performance vs. prescriptive specifications. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken ENGR 691B (Performance and Durability of Concrete Materials) may not take this course for credit.
CIVI 6031 Seismic Assessment and Retrofit of Structures (4 credits)
Seismic rehabilitation requirements and performance objectives. Evolution of codes, standards and regulations. Selection of retrofit design methodology. General strategies to develop rehabilitation schemes: add stiffness, damping, and/or mass reduction. Seismic assessment of existing steel structures. Behaviour and design of structures equipped with energy dissipation devices. Case studies and a project are required.
Note: Students who have taken CIVI 691B (Seismic Assessment and Retrofit of Structures) may not take this course for credit.
CIVI 6051 Design of Industrial Structures (4 credits)
Problems in the design of industrial structures in steel, reinforced concrete, masonry, and timber; rejuvenation and expansion of existing plant facilities; design of bracing systems, foundations, silos and liquid storage tanks; connections, standard details and codes. A case study and project.
CIVI 6061 Structural Health Monitoring (4 Credits)
Review of the current state of infrastructure including bridges, dams, pipelines as well as buildings. Components of civil infrastructure including smart and innovative structures. Structural Health Monitoring (SHM): principles, techniques, implementation, interdisciplinary approach, advantages and challenges. SHM systems: component and system design, sensors and instrumentation, data acquisition, data management, interpretation of SHM data, assessment of structural condition, and decision making. Damage detection methods: local and global, analytical and experimental, non-destructive evaluation, vibration based damage identification. Field applications. A project is required.
CIVI 6071 Advanced Steel Structures Design (4 credits)
Topics of this course include design principles of ductile building structures; fundamentals of stability theory, frame stability; concept, methods and applications of plastic analysis; design for local and global stability of braced frames, moment-resisting frames and structures equipped with passive supplemental damping systems: hysteretic, yielding and self-centring dampers; design strategies for enhanced seismic stability; computer applications. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for CIVI 691C (Advanced Steel Structures Design) may not take this course for credit.
CIVI 6101 Planning and Design of Bridges (4 credits)
History and development of bridges; basic parameters; material, system and geometry; selection of location and optimum proportioning of different structural types; selection and design of steel and concrete highway and railway bridge structures based on requirements of economics; maintenance, aesthetics and safety; modern trends in bridge design and construction; analysis of existing bridges; numerical examples. A project is required.
CIVI 6301 Hydrology (*) (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent).
Weather elements; precipitation, stage-discharge relations; evapo-transpiration; ground water flow, method of images; streamflow hydrograph, unit hydrograph and its applications, synthetic hydrographs; laminar flow; hydrologic routing; instantaneous hydrography; hydraulic routing, method of characteristics, kinematic routing; statistical analysis, confidence intervals, stochastic generator, auto-regressive model; applications of hydrology. A case study and a project are required.
CIVI 6331 Hydraulic Engineering (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent).
Development of surface water resources; basic measurements in hydraulic engineering; storage reservoirs; practical problems; run-off characteristics of natural streams; control structures; economic analysis; energy dissipators; sediment transportation; transitions; elements of river engineering; navigation; control of floods. A case study and a project are required.
CIVI 6381 Hydraulic Structures (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent).
Design of storage dams; characteristics of spillways and other outlet works; design of control structures; principles and design of flow measuring structures; special topics. A project is required.
CIVI 6401 Transportation Systems Analysis (4 credits)
Aspects of probability and statistics as applied to transportation; network theory; system operations and safety management; applications of optimization and decision theory to selection of alternative systems and facility location; evaluation of traffic control devices; signal timing plans and management strategies. A project is required.
CIVI 6411 Urban Transportation Planning (*) (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent).
Forecasting future travel patterns; travel characteristics; systems approach to transportation planning process; land use data collection and demand analysis; trip generation; trip distribution; model and root assignment; transportation of commodities; environmental impact analysis. Computer modelling. A project is required.
CIVI 6441 Traffic Engineering (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent).
Analysis of existing traffic flow conditions; study of traffic characteristics; volume and speed surveys; capacity-performance relations for urban streets and intersections; signal timing and coordination; traffic and environmental management; computer applications in incident detection and control; analysis and management of safety. A project is required.
CIVI 6451 Pavement Design (4 credits)
Components of pavement systems; materials, tests and specifications; granular and treated bases, subgrade and drainage; earthwork and soil stabilization; mechanistic-empirical theory for pavements; damage accumulation; axle loads and stresses in pavements; design methods for flexible and rigid pavements of highways and airports; design of pavement overlays; economic requirements; design projects and computer applications. A project is required.
CIVI 6461 Pavement Management Systems (4 credits)
Topics include introduction to pavement systems; strategic, tactical and operational planning for sustainable pavements; preservation, rehabilitation, upgrading and expansion; pavement damage assessment; data collection; decision making; performance modelling; pavement deterioration; coordination and scheduling of interventions. A project is required.
CIVI 6481 Sustainable Management of Industrial Waste (4 credits)
Industrial ecology and sustainable engineering concepts, characterization and sources of industrial waste, toxicological and risk aspects of waste management; environmental impact, material flow analysis, energy balance and recovery, management of water and resources use, material minimization, storage, physical, chemical and biological transformations, recycling, reuse and disposal, life cycle assessment, regulations, ISO certification. A project is required.
CIVI 6491 Engineering Aspects of Site Remediation (4 credits)
Physico-chemical characteristics of subsurface; soil biology; introduction to subsurface transport of contaminants; site assessment techniques; bioremediation principles and techniques; physico-chemical remediation; thermal removal; in-situ and ex-situ groundwater techniques; natural attenuation; case studies; lab demonstrations. A project is required.
CIVI 6501 Foundation Engineering (4 credits)
Theoretical development of bearing capacity of shallow and deep foundations, settlement analyses, design of retaining walls, sheet piles, tiebacks and caissons, dynamic analyses of pile foundations, design of machine foundations, foundations on difficult soils, construction and performance of foundations, computer applications, case histories. A project is required.
CIVI 6511 Earth Structures and Slope Stability (4 credits)
Design and construction of earth and rockfill dams. Seepage problems, flow nets, seepage control, soil compaction and stabilization. Computer analysis of slope stability, factor of safety. Measures taken to limit and accommodate settlements. Case studies.
CIVI 6521 Soil Behaviour (4 credits)
Drained and undrained shear strength of soils, stress-strain relationships, two and three dimensional stress paths. Pore water pressure coefficients in saturated and partially saturated clays. One and three dimensional consolidation theories, design of sand drains, and applications. Special geotechnical problems. A project is required.
CIVI 6531 Soil Testing and Properties (4 credits)
Measurement and evaluation of soil consolidation, strength, and pore water pressure characteristics by means of consolidation, triaxial and direct shear tests. Application of test results to design and research problems. A project is required.
CIVI 6541 Reinforced Earth (4 credits)
Design of geotechnical structures reinforced with geotextiles and geogrids to improve their strength and deformation properties. Use of geonets and geomembranes to accelerate the drainage and consolidation of soil systems. Soil nailing and inclined piling to prevent downhill creep and slope failure. Analysis and design of stone columns used to support light structures and prevent instability due to soil liquefaction. A project is required.
CIVI 6601 Modelling in Building and Environmental Engineering (4 credits)
Continuous and discrete forms of conservation laws: mass, momentum and energy, numerical methods (finite differences, implicit and explicit schemes, finite elements). Transport of contaminants and moisture in buildings and contaminants in the environment. Modelling and measuring sources and sinks of pollutants. Computer applications to building and environmental engineering. A case study and project.
CIVI 6611 Environmental Engineering (4 credits)
Introduction to waste water treatment and control; stream pollution and control; ground water pollution; air pollution; acid rain, meteorological aspects. Noise pollution; hazardous waste disposal; solid waste management. A case study and a project are required.
CIVI 6621 Engineering Aspects of Biological Treatment of Water and Air (4 credits)
Introduction to aerobic/anaerobic microbial processes, design of aerobic and anaerobic systems for biological treatment of municipal, industrial and agricultural water and air pollution, design and modelling of activated sludge reactors, trickling filters, plug flow reactors, lagoons, nutrient removal, constructed wetlands, phytoremediation, biofilters, bioscrubbers, management of biosolids, lab demonstration. A case study and project.
CIVI 6631 Hazardous Material Management and Transportation (4 credits)
Characterization and sources of hazardous materials, accidental release of hazardous material, toxicological aspects of hazardous material; risk analysis, legal issues, management of hazardous material after catastrophic events, storage, treatments, recycling, reuse and exchange of hazardous materials, life cycle analysis, attenuation of accidental release of hazardous materials, transportation and environmental systems interface, transportation network, minimum-risk route models, determination of safe truck routes and management. A project is required.
CIVI 6641 Unit Operations in Environmental Engineering (4 credits)
Physical and chemical principles underlying coagulation, flocculation, sedimentation, sorption, reverse osmosis, electrodialysis, ion exchange and sludge dewatering. Design and scale-up equations for clarifiers, absorption columns, filters, centrifuges, electrodialysis stacks, air components and demineralization units, lab demonstration. A case study and a project are required.
CIVI 6651 Water Pollution and Control (4 credits)
Physical, chemical and biological characteristics of water, water quality standards, reaction kinetics and material balances, eutrophication. Containment of reactive contaminants. Natural purification processes in water system, adsorption, absorption; diffusion and dispersion, oxidation. Large-scale transport of contaminants, single and multiple source models; modelling of transport processes, computer simulation, introduction to groundwater pollution, sea-water intrusion. A case study and a project are required.
CIVI 6661 Environmental Impact Assessment (*) (4 credits)
Engineering activities and the environment; environmental ethics. Prediction and estimation, statistical analysis of impact on air, water, soil quality and biological, socio-economic, cultural environments. Water and air pollution law, solid and hazardous waste laws. Applications of GIS, Environmental inventories, assessment preparation and review. Federal and provincial laws and regulations on environmental assessment. Strategies for environmental compliance, resolution of environmental conflicts. Case studies and project.
CIVI 6671 Fate and Transport of Contaminants in the Environment (4 credits)
Physical and chemical properties of organic and inorganic contaminants, air-soil-water-cycle and contaminant interactions, adsorption/desorption models, soil components in contaminant transport, influence of groundwater composition, advective flow, diffusion transport, diffusion and dispersion coefficients, partition coefficients, mechanisms and modelling of contaminant transport in soil and groundwater, environmental fate of contaminants Case studies concerning landfills, greenhouse effects, soil and groundwater interactions, nuclear waste disposal. A project is required.
CIVI 6681 Environmental Nanotechnology (4 credits)
Topics include basic concepts of nanoscience and nanotechnology; characterization of nanomaterials; nanoscience and public policy aspects; nanoparticle transport and fate in the environment; nanohazard assessment and nanotoxicology; environmental engineering applications of nanotechnology: pollutants sensing, monitoring, control and remediation. A project is required.
CIVI 6691 Greenhouse Gases and Control (4 credits)
Topics include physiochemical characteristics of greenhouse gas (GHG) species; GHG emissions, inventories, quantification and management; international and regional standards, protocols, regulations and schemes; GHG information management systems; GHG reuse, recycling, and sequestration; GHG emissions modelling and control planning; available and emerging technologies for reducing GHG emissions. A project is required.
CIVI 6711 Asset Management for Sustainable Civil Infrastructure (4 credits)
Topics include fundamentals of the infrastructure asset management process; strategic planning, location of underground assets, condition assessment and performance indicators, deterioration models, and development of community driven levels of service; life-cycle analysis, integrated infrastructure modelling, optimized intervention plans and budget allocation, asset management software systems. A project is required.
CIVI 691 Topics in Civil Engineering I (4 credits)
Note: Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for these courses, providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number. e.g. CIVI 691A, CIVI 691B, etc.
CIVI 7001 Earthquake Engineering (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6581.
Earthquake ground motion characteristics; behaviour of buildings, bridges, etc., methods and principles of structural dynamics; inelastic action and concept of energy absorption; evaluation of damage; soil structure interaction problems; design methods and code requirements; current research. A project is required.
CIVI 7031 Dynamics of Foundations (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6581.
Principles of soil dynamics; dynamic loads, theory of vibrations and design considerations for foundations of different types; shallow foundations, deep foundations, massive machine bases; problems of soil-structure interaction. A project is required.
CIVI 7101 Theory and Design of Orthotropic Bridges (4 credits)
Prerequisite: CIVI 6101.
Natural and technical orthotropy; orthogonally stiffened plates; methods of bridge analysis and design; materials; specifications; analysis of existing orthotropic structures; numerical examples. A project is required.
CIVI 7111 Theory and Design of Modern Bridge Systems (4 credits)
Prerequisite: CIVI 6101.
Hybrid, post-stressed and composite plate girders and trusses; delta type girders; orthotropic, shell types and tubular bridges, cable-stayed and stiffened cable bridges; optimization of bridge systems; vibrations and damping capacity; aerodynamics and seismic stability; concept of safety; fatigue and carrying capacity; use of models; application of computers. A project is required.
CIVI 7121 Cable Stayed Bridges (4 credits)
Prerequisite: CIVI 6101.
Basic bridge systems; methods of structural analysis; aerodynamic stability; structural details; typical structures. A project is required.
CIVI 7311 Advanced Analysis of Groundwater Flow and Contamination (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENCS 6021.
Groundwater storage and supply; storage in confined aquifers; water table fluctuation; aquifers; steady groundwater hydraulics; aquifer tests and pumping. Groundwater flow equations; conservative and reactive contaminant transport of groundwater systems; analytical and numerical solutions of contaminant transport equations; flow and solute transport in fractured porous media; assessment of environmental impact of waste disposal operations, model implementation strategies. A project is required.
CIVI 7401 Design of Transportation Terminals (4 credits)
Prerequisites: CIVI 6401 or 6411.
Functions of transportation terminals; airports, seaports, public transit terminals; systems approach to passenger and freight terminal design; criteria for evaluating the inter-modal transfer process and user requirements. Simulation models and analytical techniques for quality of service analysis and evaluation of terminal configurations; requirements of new systems; high capacity aircraft; V/STOL aircraft, LRT and HST systems. A project is required.
CIVI 7901 Environmental Engineering Research Project (9 Credits)
Prerequisite: Completion of at least 20 credits in the Environmental Engineering program and permission of the Departmental Graduate Program Director.
This is a research project to be completed under the supervision of a full-time faculty member from the Department. The research topic must be in the field of environmental engineering, and should be selected in consultation and with the approval of a faculty supervisor. The course is graded on the basis of the student’s performance during the work period, which includes a technical report that is assessed by two faculty members in the area.
CIVI 791 Topics in Civil Engineering II (4 credits)
Note: Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for these courses, providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number. e.g. CIVI 691A, CIVI 691B, etc.
CIVI 8011 Doctoral Seminar in Civil Engineering (***)
Grading on a pass/fail basis only. No credit value.
Chemical and Materials Engineering
CHME 6001 Project in Chemical and Materials Engineering (1 credit)
The course consists of an individual project in a chosen area of study in the area of Chemical and Materials Engineering under the supervision of a faculty member. This course may be repeated for credit.
CHME 6011 Advanced Transport Phenomena (4 credits)
Topics include equations of heat, mass, and momentum transfer; viscosity, thermal conductivity and diffusivity in laminar and turbulent conditions; velocity, temperature, and concentration distributions in selected systems; Navier-Stokes equations: direct simulation and turbulence modelling – Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS); turbulence near surfaces and interphase transport; multicomponent mass transfer; transport in porous media; effects of narrow pore size; and the dusty-gas model (DGM). A project is required.
CHME 6021 Advanced Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics (4 credits)
Topics include principles, concepts, and laws/postulates of classical and statistical thermodynamics and their link to applications that require quantitative knowledge of thermodynamic properties from a macroscopic to a molecular level; basic postulates of classical thermodynamics and their application; criteria of stability and equilibria; constitutive property models of pure materials and mixtures, including molecular-level effects using statistical mechanics; equations of state; phase and chemical equilibria of multicomponent systems; and thermodynamics of polymers. Applications are emphasized through extensive problem work relating to practical cases. A project is required.
CHME 6031 Chemical Kinetics and Reaction Engineering (4 credits)
CHME 6041 Chemical Engineering Process Dynamics and Control (4 credits)
Topics include principles of process dynamics and control; step response curves; PID control; strategies for chemical process control; process model identification; dynamic chemical process simulation; model-predictive control algorithms; and assessment of controller performance. A project is required.
CHME 6051 Chemical Process Engineering and Design (4 credits)
Topics include a review of the concepts of industrial chemical process design, engineering economics, process optimization, process simulation and plant safety; the use of fundamental knowledge in science and mathematics to design practical chemical engineering facilities. Special emphasis is placed on safety, hazards, sustainability and loss prevention issues in chemical plants. A project is required.
CHME 6061 Advanced Biochemical Engineering (4 credits)
Topics include the interaction of chemical engineering, biochemistry, and microbiology; mathematical representations of microbial systems. Kinetics of growth, death, and metabolism are also covered, as well as studies of continuous fermentation, agitation, mass transfer, and scale-up in fermentation systems, and enzyme technology. A project is required.
CHME 6071 Materials Science and Engineering (4 credits)
Topics include structure, behaviour and properties of engineering materials – metals, ceramics, polymers and composites; effects of crystalline structure and imperfections; and methods of observing, measuring and interpreting properties of materials. A project is required.
CHME 6081 Advanced Separation Processes (4 credits)
Topics include a review of basic chemical and mechanical separations; multicomponent separations; membrane separations; adsorption; chromatographic separations; and ion exchange. A project is required.
CHME 6091 Statistics for Chemical Engineering (4 credits)
Topics include a review of basic statistics; hypothesis testing; multivariate statistics; linear and nonlinear regression; chemical process model calibration; and response surface methodology. A project is required.
CHME 6101 Advanced Battery Materials and Technologies (4 credits)
Topics include a review of the principles of batteries, fuel cells, and supercapacitors; electrodes and electrolytes; thermodynamics, reaction kinetics, transport phenomena, electrostatics and phase transformations of various energy storage materials, particularly lithium-ion batteries, supercapacitors, and fuel cells; and experimental methods to study key parameters of energy storage materials, focusing on a materials science approach. A project is required.
CHME 6111 Polymer Chemistry and Engineering (4 credits)
Topics include the advanced theory and industrial practice of polymers, polymer chemistry, and polymer reactor engineering. The course covers polymer chemistry and polymerization kinetics for various types of polymerization including condensation, free radical, cationic, anionic, and coordination polymerization; polymerization processes including bulk, solution, emulsion, dispersion, gas phase, and slurry processes; polymer reactor engineering, polymer materials structure and property characterization, and recent developments in the field are included. A project is required.
CHME 6121 Nanomaterials Science and Engineering (4 credits)
Topics include chemical and engineering aspects of nanomaterials. The course covers synthesis, characterization, properties, and applications of a variety of nanomaterials, with a focus on representative inorganic nanomaterials, as well as carbon nanomaterials such as fullerenes, carbon nanotubes, and graphene. A project is required.
CHME 6131 Advanced Colloid and Interface Science and Engineering (4 credits)
Topics include properties of colloids and surfactants; physical and chemical interactions between colloidal particles: attraction and repulsion; stability of colloidal dispersions; coagulation and flocculation; surface and interface tension - wettability; characterization methods of colloidal particles; the relation between interface energy and adsorption; adsorption of surfactants on interfaces; micelles; surfactants in nanotechnology; adsorption in porous media; and surface characterization methods. A project is required.
CHME 6911 Topics in Chemical Engineering I (4 credits)
Note: Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for these courses providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the title of the topic. A project is required.
CHME 7911 Topics in Chemical Engineering II (4 credits)
Note: Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for these courses providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the title of the topic. A project is required.
Electrical and Computer Engineering
COEN 6211 Biological Computing and Synthetic Biology (*) (4 credits)
Introduction to the cell and the genome. Foundations of synthetic biology and ethics. Synthetic genomes and metabolic engineering. Model organisms, such as E. coli bacteria, and synthetic cells: self-replicating cells man-made from cloned genes, a cellular membrane and the basic elements of RNA and protein synthesis. Designing computational devices for implementation in biological cells. Introduction to modelling and computer simulation of gene regulatory networks. Methods of building and testing gene regulatory networks within and without cells. Expanding functionality via inter-cellular signaling. Basic interfacing to electronic sensors and actuators. Landmark and interesting applications of synthetic biology in computer engineering and other disciplines. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for COEN 691A or BIOL 631B (Biological Computing and Synthetic Biology) may not take this course for credit.
COEN 6311 Software Engineering (4 credits)
Software life cycle, software requirements and requirement documentation. Software design: top-down and bottom-up approaches; design validation and design reviews. Software implementation, choice of a programming language and portability. Testing, debugging and verification. Design of test cases. Software documentation and its maintenance. Documentation tools and documentation portability, user interface design. A project is required.
COEN 6312 Model-Driven Software Engineering (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COEN 6311 or COMP 6471 or equivalent.
Model-Driven Architecture (MDA), domain-based system partitioning, Platform-Independent Modelling (PIM), Platform Specific Modelling (PSM), Unified Modelling Language (UML), static and dynamic modelling with UML, UML extension mechanisms, UML profiling, Object Constraint Language (OCL), model transformation, introduction to Query/View/Transformation standard, action specification (OAL), automatic system generation. A project is required.
COEN 6313 Programming on the Cloud (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COEN 6311.
Topics include definition(s) of principles of cloud-based problem solving and programming; autonomy of cloud computing, service and business models, data centres and virtualization; CAP theorem, REST API and data models; MapReduce and programming model, distributed file systems for computer clusters, development environments and tools on clouds; cloud-based access and query; cloud application design principles; applications of cloud service concepts to the  design of a real-world Internet service. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken COEN 691 (Programming on the Cloud) may not take this course for credit.
COEN 6321 Applied Evolutionary and Learning Algorithms (*) (4 credits)
Topics include heuristic learning algorithms applied to real-world problems of design, classification, prediction and abstraction. Genetic algorithms, genetic programming, evolutionary strategies, generative and developmental systems, artificial life approaches, swarm intelligence, self-modifying programs, tabu search, simulated annealing and support vector machines; introduction to deep learning architectures. Examples of practical applications and challenges focused on biological and biomedical engineering. A project is required.
COEN 6331 Neural Networks (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6131.
Fundamentals of artificial neural networks; rigorous analysis of and introduction to various network paradigms: perceptrons, backpropagation, counter-propagation, Hopfield nets, bi-directional associative memories, adaptive resonance theory, cognitron and neocognitron; neural network topologies, memories, learning, stability and convergence; applications to adaptive knowledge, knowledge processing, classification, pattern recognition, signal processing, communications, robotics and control; and assessment of current neural network technology. A project is required.
COEN 6341 Embedded System Modelling (4 credits)
Fundamental issues and state-of-the-art methods, tools and techniques for system-level design of heterogeneous multi-core embedded systems. Modelling at different levels, from abstract specification down to implementation across hardware-software boundaries. Embedded system specification using system-level design languages, SystemC and SpecC. Application modelling and analysis. Embedded multi-core platforms. Transaction-level platform modelling. Processor and RTOS modelling. Communication architecture modelling. A project is required.
COEN 6501 Digital System Design and Synthesis (4 credits)
This course introduces students to VHDL language and modelling digital circuit with VHDL. Topics include: arithmetic and logic circuits. Storage devices. Finite State Machines. Algorithmic State Machines. Timing issues. Asynchronous Design. VHDL and modelling with VHDL. Synthesis and architectural models for synthesis. Project involving system design and modelling. A project is required.
COEN 6511 VLSI Circuit Design (4 credits)
Physical design of digital circuits using technologies of Very Large Scale Integration. CMOS and BiCMOS logic blocks. CMOS processing technology, design rules, CAD issues, and limitation of CMOS technologies. Physical layouts and parasitic elements of CMOS circuits. Characterization and performance evaluation. Electrical simulation using HSPICE. Design and implementation of CMOS logic structures, interconnects, and I/O structures, emphasis on optimizing operation speed and/or power dissipation/distribution. Project of circuit design using a specified CMOS technology. A project is required.
COEN 6521 Design for Testability (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COEN 6501 or COEN 6511.
Stuck-at faults, observability, controllability, fault coverage, test vectors, automatic test pattern generation (ATPG), statistical fault analysis, ad-hoc testing, level sensitive scan design (LSSD), serial scan, parallel scan, signature analysis and BILBO, boundary scan, built-in-self-test (BIST), IDDQ testing. A project is required.
COEN 6531 ASIC Synthesis (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COEN 6501 or COEN 6511.
Introduction to high level synthesis; synthesis models. The synthesis process; High Level Description Languages; scheduling; chaining and pipelining; clock optimization and synthesis; I/O synthesis. Behavioral synthesis; architectural trade-offs in power, area and delay. Design flow with FPGAs; design flow with full-custom and semi-custom ASIC’s. A project is required.
COEN 6541 Functional Hardware Verification (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COEN 6501 or equivalent.
Review of hardware design languages. Definition of functional verification. Design for verification. Writing testbenches, simulation engines, and coverage metrics. Introduction to verification languages. Verification plan: strategies, testcases, testbenches. Modelling verification environments. Modelling input relations, intervals, events. Introduction to formal verification tools. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for COEN 691X (Hardware Functional Verification) may not take this course for credit.
COEN 6551 Formal Hardware Verification (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COEN 6501.
Design verification technology. Introduction to mathematical logic (propositional, first-order, higher-order). Formal methods. Formal specification and validation. Combinational equivalence checking. Binary decision diagrams: BDD, automata theory, sequential equivalence checking, model theory, temporal logics, model checking, proof theory, predicate logic, theorem proving, formal verification CAD tools. Practical case studies. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for COEN 7501 (Hardware Formal Verification) may not take this course for credit.
COEN 6611 Real-time Systems (4 credits)
Taxonomy of real-time systems; Scheduling algorithms for static and dynamic tasks; Fault-tolerance and reliability; Resource and resource access control; Multiprocessor scheduling, resource access control, and synchronization; Real-time communication, Case studies in distributed real-time systems (e.g., HARTS, MARS, Spring, etc.). A project is required.
COEN 6711 Microprocessors and Their Applications (4 credits)
Introduction to microprocessors and their architectures. Examples of various microprocessors. Bus and I/O Organizations. Addressing modes. Timing. Software related issues. Memory and its hierarchy. Static and dynamic memory interfacing. Synchronous and asynchronous interfacing. Interrupts. DMA. Use of Co-processors. Single chip Micro-controllers. Examples of microprocessor applications at the system level. A project is required.
COEN 6721 Fault-Tolerant Distributed Systems (4 credits)
Fundamentals of the design and analysis of fault-tolerant systems, Models for distributed systems, Fault/error models, Techniques for providing hardware/software redundancy, Fault-detection in multi-processors, Stable storage, Recovery strategies for multi-processors (checkpointing), System diagnosis, Software design faults, Experimental validation techniques, Case studies in fault-tolerant distributed systems. A project is required.
COEN 6741 Computer Architecture and Design (4 credits)
Review of basic computer architecture designs. Fundamentals of computer design and performance. Cost issues. Instruction set design principles. Memory hierarchies: registers, caches and virtual memories. Basic processor implementation issues. High performance computing issues such as pipelining, superscalar and vector processing. Input/output subsystem designs. A project is required.
COEN 691 Topics In Computer Engineering I (4 credits)
Note: Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for these courses, providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. COEN 691A, COEN 691B, etc.
COEN 7311 Protocol Design and Validation (4 credits)
Prerequisites: COEN 6311 and ELEC 6851 or COMP 6461.
OSI model, introduction to seven layers, protocols, services. Protocol modelling techniques: FSM models, Petri net models, Hybrid models. Temporal logic. Protocol specification languages of ISO: Estelle model and language. Lotos model and language. Protocol implementation and techniques from formal specification to implementation. Protocol verification techniques: communicating FSM, reachability analysis, verification using checking, protocol design validation. Protocol performance: performance parameters, performance measurement by simulation, extensions to Estelle. Protocol testing: test architectures, test sequences, test sequence languages, test design methodology. A project is required.
COEN 7741 Advanced Computer Architecture (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COEN 6741.
Multiprocessing, Parallel processing, Vector processing, MIMD, SIMD, ILP (Instruction Level Parallelism), Superscalar, VLIW, Multithreading, Systolic processors, etc. A project is required.
COEN 791 Topics In Computer Engineering II (4 credits)
Note: Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for these courses, providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. COEN 791A, COEN 791B, etc.
ELEC 6041 Large-scale Control Systems (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6131 or equivalent.
Introduction to large-scale systems and applications. Model-order reduction and minimal realization. Centralized and decentralized fixed modes (CDMs and DEMs). Characterization and computation of DEMs and approximate DEMs. Structured and unstructured DEMs. Quotient fixed modes and stabilizability of decentralized systems by means of linear time-varying control law. Effects of sampling on decentralized control systems. Centralized and decentralized robust servomechanism problem. Decentralized controller design using pole assignment technique and optimization method. A project is required.
ELEC 6051 Introduction to Analog VLSI (4 credits)
Challenges of IC techniques and of VLSI, BJT and MOS processes. Passive components; network models and simulations. Layout design rules and CAD packages. Switch, active resistor, current mirror and voltage references; differential amplifiers, comparators, operational amplifiers, transinductance amplifiers, voltage to current transducers. Noise considerations. Offset and precision techniques. Applications: RF amplifiers, filters, oscillators, current mode IC networks. A project is required.
ELEC 6061 Real-time Computer Control Systems (4 credits)
Introduction to real-time computer control systems; a review of discrete-time signals and systems, difference equations, z-transform; sampled data systems, sample and hold, discrete models; discrete equivalents of continuous-time systems; stability analysis; design specifications; design using root locus and frequency response methods; implementation issues including bumpless transfer, integral windup, sample rate selection, pre-filtering, quantization effects and computational delay; scheduling theory and priority assignment to control processes, timing of control loops, effects of missed deadlines; principles and characteristics of sensors and devices, embedded processors, processor/device interface. A project is required.
ELEC 6071 Mixed-Signal VLSI for Communication Systems (*) (4 credits)
Topics include overview of wireline communication links, mechanisms of signal degradation, modulation formats, TX/RX synchronization options, IC technology limitations, transmitter front-end circuits, receiver front-end circuits, decision circuits, clock and data recovery systems, phase-locked loops, jitter, continuous-time and discrete-time equalizers, system metrics. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for ELEC 691N (Mixed-Signal VLSI for Communication Systems) may not take this course for credit.
ELEC 6081 Modern Analog Filter Design (4 credits)
Review of network analysis. Magnitude and frequency scaling. Magnitude and phase approximation in synthesis of filter functions. Second order active RC filters. Synthesis of all-pole LC ladder filters. Second order switched capacitor filters. Integrated circuit filters. A project is required.
ELEC 6091 Discrete Event Systems (4 credits)
Introduction to discrete-event systems (DES). Modelling (languages, automata and Petri nets). Supervisory control (controllability, modular control and control under partial observation). Architecture (decentralized and hierarchical schemes). Petri nets (modelling and analysis). Timed models. A project is required.
ELEC 6111 Detection and Estimation Theory (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENCS 6161.
Basic hypothesis testing, cost functions, Bayes and Neyman Pearson tests, the power of a test, sequential tests; estimation, Bayes estimates, maximum a posteriori estimates; the Cramer-Rao inequality, maximum likelihood estimates; composite hypothesis testing, application of estimation theory to phase locked loops, vector representation of signals in noise, application of the Kharhunen-Loeve expansion, complex analytic representation of signals; detection and estimation of signals in white and non-white noise, the matched filter, composite hypothesis testing, random amplitude and phase, multi-path channels, waveform estimation, Wiener filters, Kalman filters. A project is required.
ELEC 6131 Error Detecting and Correcting Codes (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENCS 6161 or ELEC 6831.
Introduction to abstract algebra; linear block codes: cyclic, BCH, and Reed-Solomon codes; convolutional codes; TCM codes; introduction to iterative based codes; turbo codes, LDPC codes; trade-offs between power, bandwidth, data rate and system reliability. A project is required.
ELEC 6141 Wireless Communications (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6831.
Topics include wireless radio link analysis; receiver sensitivity and receiver noise sources; path loss, shadowing, and fading models; area coverage and range calculation; introduction to cellular systems: frequency reuse, trunking and grade of service, sectoring and cell splitting, coverage and capacity. Modulation techniques for mobile communications, spread-spectrum techniques; multiplexing and multiple access techniques; wireless standards from first generation to fourth generation; OFDM: an architecture for the fourth generation. A project is required.
ELEC 6151 Information Theory and Source Coding (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENCS 6161.
Entropy of a source, rate distortion functions, source coding, analog to digital conversion, effects of sampling and quantization, vector quantization, discrete memoryless channels and their capacity, cost functions, channel coding theorem, channel capacity, fundamental concepts of information theory with applications to digital communications, theory of data compression, broadcast channels, application to encryption, DES, public key encryption, computational complexity. A project is required.
ELEC 6171 Modelling and Analysis of Telecommunications Networks (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENCS 6161.
Application of queuing theory to the analysis of the performance of telecommunication systems; Poisson arrival process and its properties; Birth-death processes applied to queuing, service distributions; performance measures of a queuing systems; examples of queuing systems in equilibrium; finite and infinite server and population models; Erlang blocking formulae; method of stages.; Networks of queues; product-form solution for open and closed queuing networks; computational algorithms for queuing networks; the imbedded Markov chain technique applied to queues with general service distribution, analysis of multiple access techniques, TDMA, FDMA, polling, CDMA, ALOHA and CSMA. A project is required.
ELEC 6181 Real-time and Multimedia Communication over Internet (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6851.
Review of Internet architecture and protocols. Network impairments: jitter and delay. RTP: transport protocols for real-time data. Packet scheduling, QoS in the Internet: differentiated services, integrated services, Resource reservation protocol (RSVP), Multi protocol label switching (MPLS). Voice/Fax/Video over IP. Internet-to-PSTN. Protocols and standards - H.323, Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) and Media Gateway Control Protocol (MGCP). Internet telephony signaling. Interoperability issues. A project is required.
ELEC 6221 Solid State Devices (*) (4 credits)
Junction theory (PN junctions, Schottky and ohmic contacts, heterojunctions). Structures and characteristics of diodes, solar cells, bipolar transistors, and fundamentals of MOSFETs. Planar silicon junctions and transistors will be designed, fabricated and evaluated in the laboratory, including resistivity measurements, semiconductor cleaning, oxidation, diffusion, photolithography, etching, metallization, and the comparison of design with experimental results. A project is required.
ELEC 6231 Design of Integrated Circuit Components (*) (4 credits)
The structure, characteristics, and design of MOS capacitors and MOSFETs, FinFETs, SOI FETs, velocity-modulation transistors, and HFETs. Role of strain in operation of modern FETs. Planar MOS devices, including capacitors and MOSFETs will be designed, fabricated and evaluated in the laboratory. A project is required.
ELEC 6241 VLSI Process Technology (*) (4 credits)
Introduction to basic VLSI technologies; crystal growth, thermal oxidation, diffusion, ion implantation, chemical vapour deposition, wet and dry etching, and lithography. Layout, yield, and VLSI process integration. The lab demonstrates a semiconductor device fabrication process. A project is required.
ELEC 6251 Microtransducer Process Technology (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6231 or ELEC 6241.
Overview of micromachining process. Bulk-micromachined structures and devices. Anisotropic etching of silicon; phenomena, processes, geometry, crystal physics. Surface-micromachined structures, devices, processes. CMOS-compatible micromachining. Case-study examples. A project is required.
ELEC 6261 Optical Devices for High-Speed Communications (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6221 or equivalent.
Overview of optical properties of semiconductors. The fundamental principles for understanding and applying optical fiber technology, fundamental behaviour of the individual optical components and their interactions with other devices. Lasers, LED’s, optical fibers, light detectors, optical switches. Concepts and components of WDM and DWDM. A comprehensive treatment of the underlying physics such as noise and distortion in optical communications, light polarization, modulation and attenuation. A project is required.
ELEC 6271 Nanoscience and Nanotechnology: Opto-Electronic Devices (4 credits)
This course covers the fundamental principles of nanoscience and nanotechnology which include principles of quantum mechanics and quantum properties of solid state materials. Properties of metal and semiconducting nanoparticles and their synthesis; Carbon nanostructures and nanotubes; bulk nanostructured materials; Solid disordered nanostructures and nanostructured crystals; quantum wells, quantum wires, and quantum dots and their physical properties; preparation of quantum nanostructures, Introduction to NanoElectroMechanical Systems (NEMS), nanomachining and fabrication of nanodevices. A project is required.
ELEC 6281 Principles of Solid State Nanodevices (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6271 or equivalent.
Theoretical basis of nanodevices. Overview of fundamental quantum phenomena in semiconductors. Electronics in low-dimensional structures (two-dimensional electron gas, quantum wire and dots, electron scattering, transport). High-speed electron devices based on quantum structures (nanoscale MOSFETs, high-electron-mobility transistors, resonant-tunneling diodes and transistors, superlattice-based transistors). Logic gates based on quantum devices. Quantum optoelectronics (optical transitions in quantum structures, quantum well, quantum dots photodetectors and lasers, quantum cascade lasers). Single electron devices. Carbon nanotube transistors, molecular electronics and spintronics. Nanodevice technology and characterization. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for ELEC 691X (Principles of Solid State Nanodevices) may not take this course for credit.
ELEC 6301 Advanced Electromagnetics (4 credits)
Maxwell's equations and boundary conditions. Theorems: uniqueness, reciprocity, surface and volume equivalence. Vector potentials and solution of the homogeneous and inhomogeneous wave equations. Waveguides and scattering formulations in rectangular and cylindrical coordinates. Dielectric waveguides. Physical optics. Selected topics in integral and differential equations, ray-optical techniques, and computational methods. Applications to antennas and microwaves. A project is required.
ELEC 6311 Radiation and Scattering of Waves (4 credits)
Construction of Green’s functions. Canonical problems – waveguide, cylinder, wedge, dielectric slab. Sommerfeld integrals. Impedance boundary conditions. Surface and leaky waves. Asymptotics, method of steepest descent, method of stationary phase. High-frequency uniform asymptotic methods. Geometrical theory of diffraction. Edge diffraction, creeping waves. Applications to problems in antennas, computational electromagnetics, electromagnetic compatibility, propagation, and scattering. A project is required.
ELEC 6341 Antennas (*) (4 credits)
Antenna fundamentals and definitions. Radiation integrals. Dipoles and loops. Arrays. Antenna self and mutual inductance. Matching techniques. Travelling wave antennas. Broadband antennas. Equivalence principle. Aperture antennas. Numerical techniques. Antenna measurement techniques. A project is required.
ELEC 6351 Modern Antenna Theory (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6341.
Helmholtz equation, Green’s function, current element, the ideal dipole, radiation impedance, gain directivity, reciprocity, polarization. Half-wave dipole, antennas above ground, small loop antenna, arrays of antenna, array factor, pattern multiplication array synthesis, mutual impedance, aperture antenna. Hallens integral equation, Pocklingons equation, numerical solution by the method of weighted residuals, and by the moment method, wire grids. Magnetic field integral equation and solid surfaces. Aperture antennas, aperture integration, geometrical optics, physical optics. Geometrical theory of diffraction, wedge diffraction coefficients, applications, multiple diffraction and diffraction by curved surfaces. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for ELEC 7341 may not take this course for credit.
ELEC 6361 Acoustics (*) (4 credits)
Sound generation and propagation in elastic media; conversion between acoustical, electric and mechanical energy. Lumped-parameter approximations, sound in rooms, underwater acoustics, microphones; loudspeakers and audio communications problems; noise and vibration control problems. A project is required.
ELEC 6371 Design of Wireless RF Systems (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6391.
Introduction to wireless systems. Noise and distortion in microwave systems. Antennas and propagation. Amplifiers. Mixers. Transistor oscillators and frequency synthesizers. Modulation techniques. Receiver design. Use of RF CAD tools. A project is required.
ELEC 6381 Techniques in Electromagnetic Compatibility (4 credits)
Introduction to EMC procedures, control plans and specifications. Radiated and conducted susceptibility and emission testing. Introduction EMC antennas, antenna concepts, electric and magnetic dipoles, biconical dipoles, conical log spiral antennas, setting up fields for susceptibility testing, measuring radiation from equipment. Coupled transmission lines, pulse propagation, closely spaced parallel transmission lines, capacitive coupling, inductive coupling, shielding against magnetic fields. Shielding and enclosures, electric and magnetic field screening mechanisms, shielding effectiveness, grounding considerations. EMC test facilities, screened rooms, TEM cells. Signals and spectra, intermodulation, cross-modulation, the spectrum analyzer. Noise and pseudo-random noise, noise performance of measurement/receiving systems, noise equivalent bandwidth, noise figure, antenna noise temperature and S/N ratio. A project is required.
ELEC 6391 Microwave Engineering (*) (4 credits)
Properties of waveguides, striplines and microstrips. Scattering parameters. Butterworth and Chebyshev impedance transformers. Microwave couplers, cavities, and Fabry-Perot resonators. Periodic structures. Microwave filter design. Faraday rotation and non-reciprocal devices. A project is required.
ELEC 6411 Power Electronics I (*) (4 credits)
Introduction to power electronic systems. Semiconductor switches. Basic power converter configurations. Line commutated controlled and uncontrolled ac-dc rectifiers. Basic dc-dc converters. Pulse width modulation techniques. Basic dc-ac converters. Switching power supplies. Applications to industrial power supplies and motor drives. A project is required.
ELEC 6421 Renewable Energy Systems (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6411.
This course covers electrical basics and models of solar energy (photo-voltaics); electrical power from wind energy (including turbine operation); electrical power from wave and tidal energy; electrical power from micro-hydro and biomass waste to energy. Fundamental energy equations will be derived from physics and the electrical power equations developed. Engineering design implications will be discussed. Design assignments are given to reinforce the engineering design based on fundamental physics. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for ELEC 691Z (Renewable Energy Systems) may not take this course for credit.
ELEC 6431 Advanced Electrical Machines and Drives (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6471 or ELEC 6491.
Transient modelling of electrical machines. ABC, Park’s transform and d,q, two axis modelling of synchronous and induction machines. Application of the advanced models to machine transients, for example, direct on line starting or reclosing operation. Vector control of AC machines including permanent magnet machines. Differences between permanent magnet AC and brushless DC machines. Switched reluctance motor modelling and operation. Modelling of losses in machines. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for ELEC 691K may not take this course for credit.
ELEC 6461 Power Electronics II (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6411.
Circuits and operating principles of self commutated dc-dc and dc-ac converters. One and four quadrant dc-dc converters. Single-phase and three-phase voltage source and current source inverters. Pulse width modulation strategies. Resonant converters. Soft switching techniques. Isolated dc-dc converters. Application to switch-mode power supplies, uninterruptible power supplies and ac motor drives. A project is required.
ELEC 6471 Hybrid Electric Vehicle Power System Design and Control (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6411.
Introduction to Electric Vehicles (EV), Hybrid Electric Vehicles (HEV). Vehicle design fundamentals. Traction motors for EV/HEV propulsion. On-board energy sources and storage devices: high-voltage traction batteries, fuel cells, ultra-capacitors, flywheels. Power electronic converters and control. Various EV/HEV/Fuel Cell Vehicle topologies and modelling. Energy management strategies. Practical design considerations. Engineering impact of electric, hybrid electric, and fuel cell vehicles. A project is required.
ELEC 6481 Computer-Aided Analysis and Design of Electric Machines (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6411.
This course uses machine design software to aid in the analysis and design of electrical machines, which is offered in a computer-aided design (CAD) environment. The emphasis is on the design of electrical machines for renewable energy and electric vehicle applications. Emphasis is placed on permanent-magnet and switched reluctance machines, although machines of importance, like the induction machine, are also discussed. Magnetic equivalent circuits for a magnet and a typical machine radial field geometry are developed which lead naturally to sizing equations. Other geometries and Eddy current and hysteresis core loss models are presented. The torque angle curves of the switched reluctance machine are developed, which lead to design concepts. The synchronous reluctance machine is introduced. A project is required.
ELEC 6491 Controlled Electric Drives (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6411.
Elements of a drive system; characteristics of common mechanical systems; drive characteristics; operation in one, two or four quadrants. Fully controlled rectifier drives; braking of DC motors; control of DC motors using DC/DC converters. Control of polyphase induction motors; voltage-source and current source inverter drives; frequency-controlled induction motor drives; introduction to vector control of induction motor drives; field oriented control (FOC); sensor-less operation. Control of synchronous motors; permanent magnet motors. Switched reluctance motor (SRM) drives; stepper motors. Brush-less DC (BLDC) motor drives; low-power electronic motor drives. A project is required.
ELEC 6601 Digital Signal Processing (4 credits)
Discrete-time signals and systems, difference equation; the discrete Fourier series and transform; the Z-transform and LTI systems; sampling of continuous-time signals. Reconstruction of signals using interpolation, sampling of discrete-time signals, discrete-time decimation and interpolation, changing the sampling rate by integer and non-integer factor; multirate signal processing, polyphase decomposition, multirate filter banks; digital processing of analog signals, A/D and D/A converters; linear phase and non-linear phase systems, all-pass and minimum phase systems; recursive and non-recursive digital filters, common digital filter structures, common design approaches for digital filters; random signals; linear adaptive filters, Weiner and Least-Mean-Square filters. A project is required.
ELEC 6611 Digital Filters (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6601.
Approximation and design of recursive and non-recursive digital filters. Transformations. Stability. Digital filter structures including wave and lattice structures. Effect of quantization, noise and limit cycles. Hardware implementation. Digital filter applications. A project is required.
ELEC 6621 Digital Waveform Compression (4 credits)
Prerequisites: ELEC 6601; ENCS 6161.
Numerical representation of waveform information; common waveform communication systems; statistical models used for waveforms; visual psychophysics. Differential PCM, motion estimation/compensation for video compressions. Transform coding: run length coding, Huffman and arithmetic coding, control of Q factor and Q table, segmentation/contour/edge based coding; pre-processing and post-processing strategies. Vector quantization. Sub-band coding and Wavelet Transform. Zero trees. Channel concerns: robustness, error recovery, masking video/image bit rate source models. Coding of two-level graphics. Review of standards: JPEG, MPEG, H.261. A project is required.
ELEC 6631 Video Processing and Compression (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6601.
Topics include frequency analysis video signals, colour video models; TV and video capture and display, spatial-temporal basic operations, elementary visual features; vector matrix video notation; frequency response of human vision; theory of video sampling, video quality assessment; motion modelling and estimation; temporal frame prediction, video filtering, high-dynamic-range video; fundamentals of video compression, transform coding, predictive coding, recent video compression standards, digital TV, advanced topics. A project is required.
ELEC 6641 Two-dimensional Signal and Image Processing (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6601.
Two-dimensional signals and systems: linear system fundamentals, Fourier analysis of two-dimensional signals, discrete Fourier transform, two-dimensional FIR and IIR filter design and implementations. Image enhancement and restoration: smoothing and sharpening, noise reduction, order statistics filtering, inverse filtering, Wiener filtering, constrained least-square filtering. Wavelets and filter banks: multiresolution concept, perfect reconstruction, one- and two-dimensional wavelet transforms. Introduction to image compression: lossy and lossless compression, image compression standards. Introduction to image segmentation and edge detection. Color image processing: color image representation, color space conversion, pseudo and full color image processing. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken ELEC 7631 may not take this course for credit.
ELEC 6651 Adaptive Signal Processing (4 credits)
Prerequisites: ELEC 6601; ENCS 6161.
Optimal filtering; adaptive filter structures; linear prediction; lattice structures; Levinson recursion. The LMS-based algorithms; basic LMS and properties; mean-square error surface; stability and convergence behavior; normalized LMS; affine projection. Recursive least-square methods; method of least-squares; block least-squares methods. Frequency-domain and sub-band adaptive filters. Kalman filtering. Applications of adaptive filters. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken ELEC 7601 may not take this course for credit.
ELEC 6661 Medical Image Processing (*) (4 credits)
Topics include principles and techniques used in the processing and analysis of medical images; image quality metrics, denoising medical images, quantification, rigid and deformable registration; similarity metrics such as mutual information (MI); images from the most common medical imaging modalities (X-ray, CT, MRI and ultrasound) will be used. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken ELEC 691 (Medical Image Processing) may not take this course for credit.
ELEC 6671 Biological Signal Processing (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6601.
This course covers signal processing through discussion of current bioengineering activities which rely on signal processing and include assessment of neural function with simultaneous collection of electroencephalogram (EEG) and functional MRI data; the noninvasive assessment of cardiac autonomic regulation using electrocardiography; assessment of neural function using near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS); assessment of muscle activity using electromyography (EMG). Topics include modern spectral analysis, time-frequency analysis (short-time Fourier transforms and wavelets); signal modelling; multivariate analyses and adaptive filtering. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for ELEC 691 (Biological Signal Processing) may not take this course for credit.
ELEC 6831 Digital Communications (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6601.
Topics include random processes and linear systems; baseband modulation/demodulation, optimal receivers in AWGN, correlation and matched-filter receivers, pulse shaping for band-limited channels; bandpass modulation techniques such as PAM, PSK, DPSK, FSK, QAM; synchronization, timing and carrier recovery, maximum-likelihood carrier phase and symbol timing estimation; error control coding, linear block codes, syndrome-based decoding, system bit error rate and coding gain. A project is required.
ELEC 6841 Advanced Digital Communications (4 credits)
Prerequisites: ELEC 6831; ENCS 6161.
Digital signaling over band-limited channels: signal design for band-limited channels, maximum likelihood sequence detection, equalization techniques, e.g., zero-forcing, minimum mean squared error, adaptive equalization. Advanced coding and modulation: concatenated coding with iterative decoding, coded modulation techniques. Diversity techniques for fading channels. Synchronization techniques: carrier and timing recovery, frequency estimation techniques, frame and network synchronization, maximum-likelihood estimation and Cramer-Rao bounds. A project is required.
ELEC 6851 Telecommunications Networks (4 credits)
Communication Networks and Services; Introduction to Layered Network Architectures; Transmission systems and the Telephone Network: multiplexing circuit switching, routing and signaling; Peer-to-Peer Protocols: ARQ protocols, data link controls, packet multiplexing, Multiple Access Communications: Aloha, CSMA, reservation schemes, polling, token-passing ring, LAN standards, LAN Bridges; Packet-switching Networks: Datagrams and virtual circuits; TCP/IP Architecture: Internet protocol, transmission control protocol. A project is required.
ELEC 6861 Higher Layer Telecommunications Protocols (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6851.
Broadband communications: concept, issues, signaling techniques, examples. Multimedia communications: traffic characteristics, classes, issues (e.g. QOS) and architectures. Internetworking: issues, architectures (e.g. router, bridge, gateway), protocols and standards: ISO, IP and IPv6. Network Management: issues, architecture, management information base (MIBs), SNMP, TMN and CMIP. Advanced topics, such as policy approach for network management. A project is required.
ELEC 6871 Fiber-Optic Communication Systems and Networks (4 credits)
Overview of the basics of optical transmitters, optical receivers, optical fibers, optical amplifiers, and SDH/SONET. Design of optical fiber amplifiers: fiber Raman amplifiers and Erbium-doped fiber amplifiers (EDFA), theories, configurations, simulation, designs, applications, requirements for optical networks. Optical transmitters: characteristics and requirements for optical networks. Optical receivers: characteristics, requirements, noise analysis. Optical systems and performance: system architectures, design guidelines, long-haul systems, dispersion management. Coherent optical systems: ASK, FSK, DPSK, system performance. DWDM systems and networks: WAN and MAN system performance, TDM, subcarrier multiplexing, CDMA, WDM network design, network survivability. Optical solition systems: fiber solitions, loss-managed solitions, dispersion-managed solitions, impact of amplifier noise, high-speed solition system. Photonic packet switching: OTDM synchronization, header processing, burst switching. Access optical networks: architectures, PON. A project is required.
ELEC 6881 Fundamentals and Applications of MIMO Communications (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6141 or ELEC 6841.
Multiple Input Multiple Output (MIMO) communication systems and wireless channel models; Diversity techniques and array processing; MIMO channel capacity; Space-time black and trellis codes; Spatial multiplexing and layered space-time architectures, diversity-versus-multiplexing tradeoff; Differential and unitary space-time coding; MIMO OFDM and space-frequency coding; Concatenated coding and iterative decoding for MIMO systems; Applications of MIMO in wireless systems. A project is required.
ELEC 6891 Broadcast Signal Transmission (*) (4 credits)
This course covers signal definition, human eye limitations, pixel representation schemes, serial digital interface (SDI); image formats (1080i, 720i, 4k, 8k); compression schemes: H.264/265; modulation and coding techniques used in broadcasting. Terrestrial transmission standards such as DVB-T2, ATSC-3; satellite broadcasting standards such as DVB/S2; MPEG transport stream (MPEG-TS), program specific information (PSI), program ID (PID), program association tables (PAT), program map table (PMT), conditional access, program, program clock reference (PCR); multiplexing and IP encapsulation, single program transport stream (SPTS) and multiple program transport stream (MPTS); video storage and retrieval. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for ELEC 691DD (Transmission in Broadcast Signal) may not take this course for credit.
ELEC 691 Topics in Electrical Engineering I (4 credits)
See Note in Topic Area E02
ELEC 6961 Graduate Seminar in Electrical and Computer Engineering (1 credit)
Students must attend a set of seminars identified by the Department and submit a comprehensive report on topics presented in one of these seminars. The report, including an abstract, must be suitably documented and illustrated, should be at least 1000 words in length, must be typewritten on one side of 21.5 cm by 28 cm white paper of quality, and must be enclosed in binding. Students are referred to Form and Style: Thesis, Reports, Term Papers, fourth edition by Campbell and Ballou, published by Houghton Mifflin. Seminar: two hours per week.
ELEC 7151 Broadband Communications Networks (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6171.
Characterization of traffic sources, data, voice and video; ATM protocol architecture, ATM switching architectures, performance evaluation of the ATM multiplexer; Call admission control in ATM networks; Traffic management in ATM, TCP/IP over ATM and wireless ATM Fluid flow approximation, z-transform techniques, and blocking for multiclass flows. A project is required.
ELEC 7441 Design of Power Electronic Circuits (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6461.
Design driving factors. Characteristics of basic converter topologies, including resonant and soft switching circuits. Characteristics and limitations of power semiconductors as switching devices. Design considerations for gate drives, snubbers, power filters and protection circuits. Printed circuit board and thermal design. Application to the practical design of typical power converter systems. A project is required.
ELEC 7451 Power System Compensation (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6411.
Steady state and dynamic characteristics of transmission systems. Theory of line compensation and reactive power control; series and shunt passive compensation. Principles of operation of static compensators and basic configurations; series, shunt and shunt-series. Flexible ac transmission systems (FACTS). Line and self commutated controllers; configurations and control aspects. Applications to distribution systems. Performance evaluation and practical applications of static compensators. A project is required.
ELEC 791 Topics in Electrical Engineering II (4 credits)
See Note in Topic Area E02
ELEC 8011 Doctoral Seminar in Electrical Engineering (***)
Grading on a Pass/Fail basis only. No credit value.
Engineering and Computer Science
ENCS 5721 Composition and Argumentation for Engineers (3 credits)
Fundamentals of English composition and argumentation: grammar, reasoning and persuasion; persuasive proofs; argumentation; structuring and outlining: the problem statement; the body; and the conclusions. Language and persuasion for effective communication in professional engineering. Cultivation of a writing style firmly based on clear and critical thinking skills. Lectures: three hours per week.
Note: This course cannot be taken within the credit requirements of the program. Students who have taken ENCS 591A (Composition and Argumentation for Engineers) may not take this course for credit.
ENCS 6001 Elements of Engineering Mathematics (3 credits)
Functions of one variable, Taylor’s series expansion, review of differentiation, integration and solution of ordinary differential equations. Functions of several variables, partial derivatives, multiple integrals, introduction to partial differential equations, wave equation and diffusion equation. Matrix and vector analysis, characteristic value problems, orthogonal functions; introduction to statistics and numerical methods. Lectures: three hours per week.
ENCS 6021 Engineering Analysis (4 credits)
Sturm-Liouville problem; orthogonal functions; ordinary differential equations with variable coefficients and power series solutions; integral transforms; partial differential equations; boundary value problems; applications to engineering problems. A project is required.
ENCS 6031 Cultures of Engineering Practice (4 credits)
Topics include historical emergence of engineering throughout the world; cross-cultural dimensions of contemporary engineering practice; qualitative research methods for cultural analysis; technical communication across cultures. Case studies and a project are required.
ENCS 6041 Creativity, Innovation, and Critical Thinking (4 credits)
Explanations of innovative and creativity thinking; approaches to problem solving, psychology of invention; diffusion of innovation; leadership through critical thinking; design creativity; modern and historical examples of innovation; and cognitive approaches to scientific and technological thinking. A project is required.
ENCS 6042 Communication Techniques for the Innovation Process (4 credits)
This course introduces theories of client-centred design. Topics and skills covered include qualitative data collection, customer development communication, and user interview techniques. Students will have hands-on experience in customer validation, audience appropriate message creation, and advanced presentation techniques for the innovation process. A project is required.
ENCS 6043 Seminar in Innovation Process (1 credit)
Prerequisites or co-requisites: ENCS 6041 and ENCS 6042.
Registration is restricted to students enrolled in the Graduate Certificate in Innovation, Technology and Society.
The seminar integrates theoretical concepts in innovation and communication processes in preparation for projects in the certificate practicum.
ENCS 6044 Practicum in Innovation Process (6 credtis)
Prerequisites: ENCS 6041, 6042 and 6043.
Registration is restricted to students enrolled in the Graduate Certificate in Innovation, Technology and Society.
The practicum takes place in the Concordia District 3 Centre for Innovation and Entrepreneurship. Students develop innovation projects under the supervision of academic advisors and District 3 instructional personnel. This course is graded on a pass/fail basis.
ENCS 6111 Numerical Methods (4 credits)
Numerical solution of partial differential equations; weighted residuals techniques with emphasis on finite differences and finite elements; convergence, stability and consistency analysis; solution of integral equations; boundary value problems; discrete Fourier series and fast Fourier transform. A project is required.
ENCS 6141 Probabilistic Methods in Design (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENCS 6011 or equivalent.
Elements of probability theory, decision models, expected costs and benefits, models from random occurrences, extreme value statistics, Monte Carlo simulation, reliability analysis, general applications to engineering design problems. A project is required.
ENCS 6161 Probability and Stochastic Processes (4 credits)
Axioms and rules of probabilities, Bayes’ Theorem, binary communication systems, Bernoulli trials and Poisson Theorem, random variables, distributions and density functions, moments, correlation, Chebyshev and Markov’s inequalities, characteristic functions, Chernoff inequality, transformation of random variable, random processes, stationarity, Bernoulli, Random Walk, Poisson, shot noise, random telegraph, and Wiener processes, stopping time; Wald’s equation, elements of Renewal Theory, Mean-Ergodic Theorem, auto and cross-correlation functions, correlation time, auto-correlation receiver, Wiener-Khinchin Theorem, power spectral density, linear system with stochastic inputs, matched filtering. Project: two hours per week.
Note: Students who have received credit for ELEC 6161 may not take this course for credit.
ENCS 6181 Optimization Techniques I (*) (4 credits)
The optimization problem; classical optimization; one dimensional search techniques; unconstrained gradient techniques; quadratically convergent minimization algorithms; constrained optimization; constrained gradient techniques; penalty-function methods; applications. Project: two hours per week.
ENCS 6191 Fuzzy Sets and Fuzzy Logic (4 credits)
Fuzzy sets, operations on fuzzy sets, fuzzy relations; fuzzy logic: connectives, implication functions, representation of fuzzy rules and fuzzy logic based reasoning; fuzzy logic in planning and control: Zadeh’s Generalized Modus Ponens type reasoning, Mamdani type reasoning, fuzzy clustering based system identification and Sugeno type reasoning; case studies. Projects on selected applications.
ENCS 6721 Technical Writing and Research Methods for Scientists and Engineers (3 credits)
This course provides graduate students with the research writing and presentation skills that are essential in academic and professional contexts. Students develop expertise and confidence in research methods, critical reading, crafting thesis statements, leading and participating in discussions, revision/editing and peer review, maintaining research dossiers and report writing.
Note: This course cannot be taken within the credit requirements of any graduate Engineering and Computer Science program, with the exception of the Diploma in Computer Science, the Master of Engineering and the Master of Applied Computer Science. Students who have taken ENCS 591B (Technical Writing and Research Methods) may not take this course for credit.
ENCS 6811 Optical Networking: Architectures and Protocols (4 credits)
This course introduces advanced concepts and protocols of modern telecommunication networks based on Photonic technology. The basics of optical communications networks will be introduced, including the enabling technology, and the main emphasis will be on network architectures and associated protocols. This includes: orientation of transport networks and their evolution (Ring and Mesh topologies); Wavelength Division Multiplexing (WDM); wavelength-routed networks; wavelength conversion; lightpath routing protocols (static, dynamic, adaptive routing and traffic grooming) and optimization problems; control and management protocols and distributed provisioning; survivable network design (proactive and reactive); fault-management and various network restoration protocols; convergence of optical networks and the Internet (IP/WDM) and Generalized Multi Protocol Label Switching (G-MPLS). There will be various assignments in which students will be involved in research projects. Knowledge of telecommunication systems and a background in network simulation is needed. Project.
ENCS 6821 Development and Global Engineering (4 credits)
This is an introductory course in international development and global engineering for graduate students. Topics may include evolution of development, globalization, development projects, planning and analysis, and participatory data gathering. A project is required.
ENCS 691 Topics in Engineering and Computer Science (4 credits)
Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the topic title following the course number on the student record, e.g. ENCS 691 Course Topic: Environment and Social Sustainability.
ENCS 6931 Industrial Stage and Training (9 credits)
Prerequisite: Completion of at least twenty credits in the program and permission of the Departmental Co-op Program Director.
This is an integral component of the Industrial Experience option that is to be completed under the supervision of an experienced engineer/computer scientist in the facilities of a participating company (a Canadian work permit is required).
Each student receives an assessment from the Departmental Co-op Program Director in consultation with the industry supervisor and the faculty advisor. Grading is on a pass/fail basis based on a proposal, monthly progress reports, a final report and a presentation.
ENCS 8011 PhD Seminar (****) (2 credits)
Prerequisite: ENCS 8511 Doctoral Research Proposal.
The PhD Seminar is designed to train students to communicate the results of their research projects to the community and participate in research discussions. This is done when the students have sufficiently progressed into their research, normally after 6 (12 for part-time students) months of being admitted to candidacy, which is normally after 24 (48 for part-time students) months of residency, and must be completed before the submission of the thesis. The student’s evaluation, reflected by either a pass or fail grade, is based upon attendance in all seminars, a report on the student’s thesis research under the direction of the thesis supervisor(s), and a presentation.
Note: Students who have completed ENCS 8011 prior to September 2005 may not take this Seminar for credit.
ENCS 8501 Comprehensive Examination (No credit value)
See Requirements for the Degree in Engineering Programs section.
ENCS 8511 Doctoral Research Proposal (6 credits)
The goal of the doctoral research proposal is to focus the student’s PhD research. The proposal must include an extensive critical review of previous work on the subject of the thesis, and a detailed research plan of action and expected milestones. Students are required to defend their doctoral research proposal before a committee that will normally be comprised of the same members as the comprehensive examination committee.
Note: Students admitted prior to September 1997 are not allowed to substitute ENCS 8511 for an equivalent course work.
ENGR 6071 Switched and Hybrid Control Systems (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6131 or equivalent.
Review of linear control design techniques for nonlinear systems and their limitations; introduction to Lyapunov stability, Lyapunov functions and LaSalle’s invariance principle; introduction to switched and hybrid systems using piecewise-affine systems as a motivating example; modelling and simulation of switched and hybrid systems; switching policies, hybrid automata and executions; Lyapunov stability analysis of switched and hybrid systems; stability as a convex optimization problem; Lyapunov-based control of switched and hybrid systems; controller design as a non-convex problem; stability analyses and the controller design problems; dynamic programming and optimal control techniques; extensive examples from simplified models of industrial problems in the aeronautical, automotive and process industries. The course includes a computer aided controller design project.
ENGR 6131 Linear Systems (*) (4 credits)
State-space representation of dynamic systems, canonical realizations, solutions, modal decomposition, stability. Controllability and observability, minimal realizations, state feedback, pole placement, observers, observer-based controllers. Introduction to optimal control, linear quadratic regulator, the Kalman filter. Limitation on performance of control systems, introduction to robustness. A project is required.
ENGR 6141 Nonlinear Systems (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6131.
Dynamic systems: definitions and notations; nonlinear differential equations; Lipschitz continuity; linearization; describing functions; phase plane analysis; Lyapunov stability; Popov and circle criteria; limit cycles. A project is required.
ENGR 6161 Sensors and Actuators (4 credits)
Elements of smart sensors and systems and their structures; properties of various smart materials including piezoelectric, pyroelectric, shape memory alloys, Rheological fluids, piezoresistive and magnetostrictive; physical and mathematical basis of smart materials; characterization of smart multi-functional materials; sensors and actuators in mechatronics; design and fabrication of sensors and actuators by micromachining; survey of classical system theory; design of sensors and actuators for applications in industrial and medical robotics, haptics, and other systems such as aerospace and smart structures. The students are required to undertake a project work involving design of smart sensors/actuators for specific applications.
ENGR 6191 Introduction to Biomedical Engineering (4 credits)
The origin and characteristics of biological potentials: nerve, muscle, heart, brain; the measurement of biological events; instrumentation systems: electrical safety, biomechanics, biomaterials, orthopaedic engineering; biomedical engineering applications/implications in industry. Project on a current topic.
ENGR 6201 Fluid Mechanics (4 credits)
Fundamental concepts of fluid mechanics; transport phenomena; stress-strain relation; equations of motion; exact solutions; dynamic similarity; specialized equations; laminar boundary layers; flow over immersed bodies; introduction to turbulent flow. Projects on selected topics.
ENGR 6221 Microfluidic Systems (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6201 or equivalent.
Introduction to microfluidics: continuum fluid mechanics, non-continuum regimes, molecular approach. Review of classical fluid mechanics: gas flows, liquid flows, two-phase flows. Microfluidic effects: low Reynolds number flows and chaotic mixing, electrokinetics, surface tension effects and electrowetting. Electrostatic/electromagnetic/piezoelectric actuation of microfluidic systems. Methods in microfluidics: computation, experimentation. Microfluidic components: microchannels, micromixers, micropumps, microvalves, microsesors. Overview of microfluidic applications: lab-on-chip devices, microstructured fuel cells. A project is required.
ENGR 6231 Microfluidic Devices for Synthetic Biology (*) (4 credits)
Topics include introduction to microfluidic components (pumps, valves, automation), programming microfluidics, fabrication techniques, microfluidic paradigms, and applications for chemical and biological analysis; introduction to synthetic biology, biological parts and their properties, network structure and pathway engineering, synthetic networks, manipulating DNA and measuring responses, basic behaviour of genetic circuits, building complex genetic networks; integration of mircofluidics and synthetic biology; economic implications. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken ENGR 691 (Microfluidic Devices for Synthetic Biology) may not take this course for credit.
ENGR 6241 Hydrodynamics (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6201.
Fundamental concepts of ideal flow; irrotational flow patterns; kinematics of flow; potential theory; standard flow patterns; conformal transformation; Cauchy-Riemann condition; complex operator; simple engineering applications. A project is required.
ENGR 6251 The Finite Difference Method in Computational Fluid Dynamics (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6201.
Classification of second order partial differential equations, boundary conditions. Finite difference discretization of equations, truncation error, explicit and implicit formulations. Numerical stability, consistency and convergence. Time dependent (parabolic) equations, explicit and implicit discretization, stability, convergence. Steady state (elliptic) equations, explicit and implicit discretization, iterative and direct solution methods. Hyperbolic equations. Formulation of flow problems and applications to incompressible, compressible and transonic inviscid and viscous flows are interspersed throughout the course. Project on specific topic or applications.
ENGR 6261 The Finite Element Method in Computational Fluid Dynamics (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6201.
Classification of second order partial differential equations, boundary conditions. The finite element method, simple examples, assembly rules, solution of linear systems of equations. Forming the modules of a general FEM computer code. The variational approach, variational principles and stationary functions. Elements and interpolation functions. The weighted residual approach Rayleigh-Ritz, least squares, subdomain and collocation, weak Galerkin formulation. Formulation of flow problems and applications to incompressible, compressible and transonic inviscid and viscous flows are interspersed throughout the course. Project on specific topic or applications.
ENGR 6281 Modelling Turbulent Flows (4 credits)
Computational methods in fluid mechanics, the Reynolds-averaged equations, scales of turbulence, two-point correlation tensors, algebraic models, one equation and two equation models, Boussinesq approximation, nonlinear constitutive relations, types of turbulent flows, multiple time scales and stiff differential equations, solution convergence and grid sensitivity, brief introduction to advanced models. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for ENGR 691C (Modelling Turbulent Flows) may not take this course for credit.
ENGR 6291 Rheology (4 credits)
Viscoelasticity, standard flows and material functions, relationships between material functions, generalized Newtonian fluid, the Maxwell model, finite linear viscoelasticity, continuum constitutive equations, effects of material, temperature and pressure on viscoelasticity behaviour, rheometry issues in viscoelastic flow simulations, industrial applications of rheology. A project is required.
Note: Basic understanding of fluid mechanics is required.
ENGR 6301 Advanced Dynamics (4 credits)
Dynamics of rigid bodies; generalized coordinates; D’Alembert’s principle; Lagrange’s equations; energy methods, Hamilton’s theory; Euler-Lagrange equations; variational principle of mechanics. Phase space canonical transformation. Language multipliers methods. Hamilton-Jacobe equation. Project on specific topic or applications.
ENGR 6311 Vibrations in Machines and Structures (*) (4 credits)
Vibrations of discrete systems: Single-Degree of Freedom (SDOF) and Multi-Degree of Freedom (MDOF) systems; continuous systems: bars, beams, membranes and plates with various boundary conditions; mode superposition; energy methods; Rayleigh-Ritz Method; condensation techniques; applications to machine components, rotor bearing systems, vehicle and aerospace structures. Project on selected topics is an integral part of the course.
ENGR 6371 Micromechatronic Systems and Applications (*) (4 credits)
Introduction to microsystems and devices; mechanical properties of materials used in microsystems; microfabrication and post-processing techniques; sacrificial and structural layers; lithography, deposition and etching; introduction and design of different types of sensors and actuators; micromotors and other microdevices; mechanical design, finite element modelling; design and fabrication of free-standing structures; microbearings; special techniques: double sided lithography, electrochemical milling, laser machining, LIGA, influence of IC fabrication methods on mechanical properties; application examples in biomedical, industrial and space technology areas; integration, bonding and packaging of MEMS devices. This course includes a project.
ENGR 6411 Robotic Manipulators I: Mechanics (*) (4 credits)
Types of industrial robots and their applications. Mathematical analysis for robot manipulation: homogeneous transformations; definition and solution of kinematic equations governing the position and orientation of the hand. Force analysis and static accuracy; forces and moments of inertia, dynamic equation of equilibrium, differential equations of motion of robotic arms. Robotic actuators. Project on specific topic or applications.
ENGR 6412 Autonomy for Mobile Robots (*) (4 credits)
Topics include application of autonomous wheeled robots: autonomous cars, indoor robots, (off-road) unmanned ground vehicles; robot motion models, robot odometry; robot sensor models: beam models of range finders, feature-based measurement models; occupancy grid mapping; the Bayes Filter; the Kalman filter; the particle filter; robot localization: particle filter localization, Kalman filter localization; introduction to simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM). A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for ELEC 691 MM (Autonomy for Mobile Robots) may not take this course for credit.
ENGR 6421 Standards, Regulations and Certification (4 credits)
Overview of DoT and other international (FAA, etc.) aviation standards, regulations and certification procedures; regulatory areas, namely, pilot training/testing, air traffic procedures, aircraft systems design and airworthiness; development process for new regulations and criteria for certification. Projects on selected topics.
ENGR 6441 Materials Engineering for Aerospace (4 credits)
Fundamentals of materials engineering and processing with special emphasis on aerospace engineering materials and protection against failure; microstructures, phase equilibria for aerospace materials, dislocations, deformation, strain hardening and annealing, recovery, recrystallization; hot and cold metal forming (aircraft fabrication), solidification, castings (process and defects); welding and non-destructive testing, solid solution and dispersion strengthening; ferrous alloys and super alloys, light alloys (AL, MG, TI), ceramic materials, polymers, composite materials (polymer matrix/metal matrix); corrosion, fatigue and creep failure; fracture and wear. Projects on selected topics.
ENGR 6461 Avionic Navigation Systems (4 credits)
Introduction: history of air navigation; earth coordinate and mapping systems; international navigation standards; airspace and air traffic control structure; basics of flight instruments and flight controls; fundamental concepts of navigation. Classification of modern avionic navigation systems. Basics of air traffic communication: radio wave propagation; VHF and HF systems. Short range, long range, approach/terminal area avionic navigation systems and radar systems: principles; design; advantages/disadvantages; errors; impact of global positioning system and future trends. Introduction to advanced integrated avionic systems. Projects on selected topics.
ENGR 6471 Integration of Avionics Systems (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6461.
Introduction to the basic principles of integration of avionics systems; review of Earth’s geometry and Newton’s laws; inertial navigation sensors and systems (INS); errors and uncertainty in navigation; global positioning system (GPS); differential and carrier tracking GPS applications; terrestrial radio navigation systems; Kalman filtering; integration of navigation systems using Kalman filtering; emphasis on integration of GPS and INS using Kalman filtering. A project is required.
ENGR 6501 Applied Elasticity (4 credits)
Plane stress and strain; analysis of stress and strain in three dimensions; Airy’s stress function; solution of two-dimensional problems by polynomials and Fourier series; effect of small holes in bars and plates; torsion and bending of prismatic bars; Membrane analogy; thermoelasticity; rectangular, circular, ring-shaped flat plates; applications in civil and mechanical engineering. A case study or a project is required.
ENGR 6151 Continuum Mechanics (4 credits)
This course presents the macroscopic mechanical behaviour of continuously distributed solid and fluid materials. This is a fundamental graduate course in the field of mechanical or aerospace engineering, which  covers basic principles of continuum mechanics and their engineering applications. All laws of continuum mechanics are formulated in terms of quantities that are independent of coordinates. Thus, in this course, first the concept of tensors is presented in detail as the linear transformation. This is followed by the formulation of the kinematics of very small and large deformation and the description of stresses and the basic laws of continuum mechanics common to all materials. Finally, constitutive equations governing the behaviours of idealized materials, including the elastic, hyperelastic and viscous materials, are presented as applications of these laws. A project is required.
ENGR 6511 Fundamentals of Finite Element Analysis of Structures (*) (4 credits)
Topics include matrix formulation of the force and of the displacement methods of analysis; direct stiffness approach, finite element methods for structural analysis; truss, beam, plane strain, plane stress, shell and solid elements; computer applications. A project is required.
ENGR 6531 The Finite Element Method in Structural Mechanics (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6511.
Displacement analysis of structures; finite elements of a continuum; applications of the method to stress analysis of two-and three-dimensional structures; stability problems; vibrations and heat transfer; digital computer applications. A project is required.
ENGR 6541 Structural Dynamics (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6511.
Dynamic behaviour of structures; lumping of masses; motion of elastic framed structures caused by arbitrary disturbances; analytical and numerical methods of solution; approximate determinations of natural frequencies in elastic systems; dynamic response of framed structures in the inelastic range; continuous systems, introduction to approximate design methods. A case study or a project is required.
ENGR 6551 Theory of Elastic and Inelastic Stability (4 credits)
Analysis of elastic and inelastic stability of columns; frame buckling; beam-columns, strength of plates, shear webs and shells; torsiona; flexural buckling of thin-walled, open sections; snap-through; critical discussion of current design specifications; applications to structures. A case study or a project is required.
ENGR 6561 Theory of Plates and Shells (4 credits)
Analysis of deformation and stress in plates and flat slabs under transverse loads; various boundary conditions; numerical methods; membrane stresses and displacements in shells under various loading; bending theory of shells; limit analysis of rotationally symmetric plates and shells; applications to shell type structures such as folded plate structures; sandwich plates; shell roofs and pressure vessels. A case study or a project is required.
ENGR 6571 Energy Methods in Structural Mechanics (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6511.
Principles of virtual work, total potential and complementary energy. Reisner’s Principle. Introduction to calculus of variations. Ritz and Galerkin’s methods. Applications to frame, plate and shell structures. A project is required.
ENGR 6581 Introduction to Structural Dynamics (*) (4 credits)
Theory of vibrations. Dynamic response of simple structural systems. Effects of blast, wind, traffic and machinery vibrations. Basic concepts in earthquake resistant design. Computer applications. A case study or a project is required.
ENGR 6601 Principles of Solar Engineering (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 6541.
Magnitude and availability of the solar energy input, including seasonal and diurnal variations of direct beam radiation; spectral distribution of sunlight; scattering and absorption processes; diffuse radiation; influence of cloud cover. Magnitude and time variation of typical loads, including space heating and cooling water heating; dehumidification. Principles of passive and active methods of solar collection, thermal conversion, and energy storage. Analysis of systems and components, including treatment of thermal and turbulent losses; efficiency calculations; electrical analogies; impedance matching and system optimization. Economics of systems. A case study or a project is required.
ENGR 6611 Equipment Design for Solar Energy Conversion (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6201.
This course emphasizes the mechanical design of solar heating and cooling systems and consists of the following topics: thermodynamic analysis of radiation, collection and conversion of solar energy, selection and manufacturing of components such as collectors, piping, line insulation, heat exchangers, etc., solar cooling and dehumidification, control of solar energy systems, case studies and project experiences. A case study or a project is required.
ENGR 6661 Solar Energy Materials Science (4 credits)
The place of organisms and materials in the solar energy cycle; physical, chemical and optical phenomena. Selective absorbers: surfaces and films, emissivity, thermal conversion, role of crystal defects and phase interfaces in metals and semiconductors. Reflector characteristics and damage modes. Optical and mechanical properties of glass, polymer and composite windows. Photovoltaic: physics and materials. Chemical, thermal and photo stability. Thermal transfer and storage media: gaseous, aqueous, organic; phase change and particulate systems; stability and corrosive effects. A case study or a project is required.
ENGR 6811 Energy Resources: Conventional and Renewable (4 credits) Depletion of conventional energy sources. Emission of greenhouse gases from conventional power production systems. Principles of renewable energy systems; cogeneration of electrical and thermal energy, photovoltaic systems, wind power, fuel cells, hybrid systems. Hydrogen and other forms of energy storage for renewable power production. Integrated and small-scale renewable energy systems; independent versus grid-connected systems. A case study or a project is required.
ENGR 691 Topics in Engineering I (4 credits)
See Note in Topic Area E02
ENGR 692 Case Study and Report (1 credit)
Students complete a case study and submit a report on a topic related to the students’ discipline, supervised by a professor, and approved by the Graduate Program Director in students' home department. The case study and report must present a current engineering problem or practice related to the students' research interest.
Note: This course cannot be taken by students enrolled in the SOEN program.
ENGR 6951 Seminar on Space Studies (4 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of Instructor.
Introduction to the science and technology of spaceflight; remote sensing; human factors in space; automation and robotics; space law; space transportation systems; the space station; the Moon-Mars initiative; space utilization; interplanetary travel. Project on selected topic.
ENGR 6971 Project and Report I (4 credits)
See Requirements for the Degree in Engineering Programs section. Project: 8 hours per week.
ENGR 6981 Project and Report II (4 credits)
See Requirements for the Degree in Engineering Programs section. Project: 8 hours per week.
ENGR 6991 Project and Report III (5 credits)
See Requirements for the Degree in Engineering Programs section. Project: 10 hours per week.
ENGR 7011 Graduate Seminar in Mechanical and Industrial Engineering (1 credit)
Seminar: 2 hours per week.
ENGR 7121 Analysis and Design of Linear Multivariable Systems (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6131.
Representation of linear multivariable systems. Controllability, observability and canonical forms; poles and zeroes; multivariable system inverses; the linear quadratic regulator problem; the robust servomechanism problem; the minimal design problem; frequency-domain design techniques. Project: 2 hours per week.
ENGR 7131 Adaptive Control (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC, 6061, ENGR 6131.
Real-time parameter estimation; least-squares and regression models; recursive estimators; model reference adaptive systems (MRAS); MRAS based on gradient approach and stability theory; self-tuning regulators (STR); adaptive prediction and control; stability and convergence results, robustness issues; auto-tuning and gain scheduling; alternatives to adaptive control; practical aspects; implementation and applications. Project: 2 hours per week.
ENGR 7181 Digital Control of Dynamic Systems (4 credits)
Prerequisites: ELEC 6061, ENGR 6131.
Review of discrete-time and sampled-data systems; discrete input-output and state-space equivalents; controllability and observability of sampled-data systems; controller design using transform techniques, design using state-space methods; generalized sample-data hold functions; optimal control; quantization effects; multi-rate sampling; robust control; discrete-time non-linear systems; discrete-time multivariable systems. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for ENGR 6181 may not take this course for credit.
ENGR 7201 Micro-Gravity Fluid Dynamics (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6201.
Forces and accelerations in space environment; zero-gravity simulation, free falling capsules, flights in Keplerian trajectories, sounding rockets, and the space station; surface tension; main non-dimensional parameters; Laplace-Young equation; contact angle; Dupre’s equation; Neumann’s triangle; minimization principle associated with Laplace’s equation; equilibrium shapes of a liquid, small oscillations of ideal and viscous fluids, liquid handling problems at low gravity, liquid positioning and control, vortexing capillary; numerical simulations of liquid dynamics in microgravity environment. Projects on selected topics.
ENGR 7331 Random Vibrations (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6311.
Mathematical descriptions of stochastic processes; spectral density and correlation functions; Gaussian and non-Gaussian random processes; Markov processes and Fokker/Planck equation; response of linear and nonlinear oscillatory systems to random excitation; non-stationary and narrow-band random processes. Project on selected research topic or applications.
ENGR 7401 Robotic Manipulators II: Control (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6411.
Control of a single link manipulator; position, velocity and acceleration errors; control of a multiple link manipulator sensor: vision, proximity, touch, slip, force, compliance and force controlled robots. Computer control of robots, command languages. Introduction to intelligent robots. Project on selected topics of current interest.
ENGR 7461 Avionic Systems Design (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6461.
Definitions, purpose, history and evolution of avionic systems; cockpit displays configurations, classifications, and design considerations; ARINC communication bus system standards; air data computer system; navigation systems; automatic flight control systems; monitoring/warning/alert systems; flight management systems; system integration; advanced concepts and future trends. Projects on selected topics.
ENGR 7501 Advanced Finite Element Method in Structural Mechanics (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6511 or equivalent.
Topics include finite elements of a continuum; applications of the method to stress analysis of two- and three-dimensional structures; stability problems; vibrations and heat transfer; non-linear methods; computer applications. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken ENGR 6531 may not take this course for credit.
ENGR 7521 Advanced Matrix Analysis of Structures (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6511.
Displacement method for two- and three-dimensional analysis of structures. Nonlinear large displacement analysis by stiffness method. Matrix formulations of vibration and stability problems. Computer applications. A project is required.
ENGR 7531 Boundary Element Method in Applied Mechanics (4 credits)
Boundary integral formulations of Axi-Symmetric, two- and three-dimensional potential and elastostatic problems. Treatment of thermal effects, singularity elements, infinite boundary elements. Coupling of boundary elements and finite elements. Introduction to non-linear, elastostatic problems. Numerical implementation. A case study or a project is required.
ENGR 791 Topics in Engineering II
See Note in Topic Area E02
ENGR 7961 Industrial “Stage” and Training (6 credits)
Prerequisite: Completion of at least twelve credits in the composite option and at least twenty-one credits in the aerospace program or permission of program director.
This is an integral component of the aerospace program and the composites option in the Mechanical Engineering program that is to be completed under the supervision of an experienced engineer in the facilities of a participating company (Canadian work permit is required). The topic is to be decided by a mutual agreement between the student, the participating company and the program director. The course is graded on the basis of the student’s performance during the work period, which includes a technical report.
ENGR 8901 Master of Applied Science Research and Thesis (29 credits)
See Requirements for the Degree in Engineering Programs section.
ENGR 8911 Doctoral Research and Thesis (70 credits)
See Requirements for the Degree in Engineering Programs section.
Information Systems Engineering
INSE 6100 Advanced Java Platforms (4 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the CIISE is required.
This course emphasizes the architecture and the inner workings of the Java virtual machine; 3 distributions of the Java Platform: the micro-addition, the standard addition and the enterprise addition; the JCP process and the Java standards purposed as API extensions; semantic foundations of Java: static semantics and dynamic semantics. Introduction of technologies that are used to accelerate (performance analysis, hardware accelerators, ahead-of-time, just-in-time, selected dynamic compilation and component-based acceleration) and secure (virtual machines, such as vulnerability analysis, Java security models, byte-code verification, access controllers, security managers, policy files, and certified compilation) Java. Semantic correctness of acceleration and security techniques will also be addressed. A project is required.
INSE 6110 Foundations of Cryptography (4 credits)
Introduction to cryptography and cryptanalysis, classical ciphers, number-theoretic reference problems, the integer factorization problem, the RSA problem, the quadratic residuosity problem, computing square roots in Zn, the discrete logarithmic problem, the diffie-hellman problem, pseudorandom bits and sequences, stream ciphers: feedback shift registers, LFSRs, RC4. Block Ciphers: SPN and Fiestel structures, DES, AES, linear cryptanalysis, differential cryptanalysis, side channel attacks, ciphertext indistinguishability, attack analysis, IND-CPA, IND-CCA, IND-CCA2, public key encryption: RSA, Rabin, ElGamal, elliptic curves cryptography, hash functions: Un-keyed hash functions, MACs, Attacks, Digital signatures: RSA, Fiat-Shamir, DSA, public key infrastructure, key management, efficient implementation of ciphers, zero-knowledge proof. A project is required.
INSE 6120 Crypto-Protocol and Network Security (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INSE 6110 or equivalent.
Cryptographic protocols, authentication protocols, key distributions protocols, e-commerce protocols, fair-exchange and contract-signing protocols, security protocol properties: authentication, secrecy, integrity, availability, non-repudiation, atomicity, certified delivery, crypto-protocol attacks, design principles for security protocols, automatic analysis, public key infrastructure, models and architectures for network security, authentication using Kerberos and X.509, email security (PGP, S/MIME), IP security, SSL/TLS protocols, virtual private networks, firewalls intrusion detection, host-based IDS, network based IDS, misuse detection methods, anomaly detection methods, intrusion detection in distributed systems, intrusion detection in wireless ad hoc networks botnet detection, analysis and mitigation, darknet traffic analysis, prediction and forecast of network threats, network security monitoring. A project is required.
INSE 6130 Operating Systems Security (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INSE 6110 or equivalent.
System security, Windows security, Linux security, Unix security, access control matrix, HRU result, OS security mechanisms, security administration, access control list, capability list, role-based access control, security policy, mandatory and discretionary access control, multi-level security, BLP policy, Biba model, conflict of interest, Chinese Wall policy, secure booting, authentication, password security, challenge response, auditing and logging, system kernel security, threat analysis, security attacks, security hardened operating, host-based intrusion detection, securing network services, firewalls and border security, registry security, embedded and real-time OS security, information flow control. A project is required.
INSE 6140 Malware Defenses and Application Security (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INSE 6110 or equivalent.
Malicious code, taxonomy, viruses, worms, trojan horses, logical and temporal bombs, infection process, security properties of applications, safety, high level security, detection approaches, ad hoc techniques: scanning, anti-virus technology, obfuscation, dynamic analysis for security: passive and active monitoring, in-line and reference monitors, sandboxing, static analysis for security: data and control flow analysis for security, type-based analysis for security, anti-reverse-engineering protection, software fingerprinting, self-certified code: certifying compilers, proof carrying code, efficient code certification, typed assembly languages, certificate generation, certificate verification and validation, C and C++ security, java security, byte-code verification, access controllers, security managers, permission files, security APIs, critical APIs, protection domains, security profiles, mobile code security. A project is required.
INSE 6150 Security Evaluation Methodologies (4 credits)
Security evaluation of information systems, security evaluation of software, security evaluation of products. Security code inspection, security testing, security standards, preparation of a security evaluation: impact scale, likelihood scale, severity scale. Vulnerability analysis, risk analysis, security plan elaboration. ITSEC, MARION, and MEHARI methods, OCTAVE, common criteria, target of evaluation, protection profile, security functional requirement, security factors, errors, accidents, assurance requirements, assurance levels, evaluation process, compliance with the protection profile, IT security ethics, privacy, digital copyright, licensing IT security products, computer fraud and abuse, incident handling, business records, security forensics, security evaluation case studies. Information security governance: risk management, business strategy, standards, COBIT. Situation awareness. A project is required.
INSE 6160 Database Security and Privacy (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INSE 6110 or equivalent.
Access control in relational databases; grant/revoke model; security by views; query modification; Oracle VPD; auditing in databases; information warfare in databases; multi-level database security; polyinstantiation and covert channel; statistical database security; inference control; security by auditing; microdata security; random perturbation; outsourced database security, encrypted databases; SQL injection attack; anomaly detection in databases; data privacy, P3P; Hippocratic databases; perfect secrecy-based privacy; k-anonymity model; l-diversity; data utility measure, data release with public algorithms, multi-party privacy preserving computation; privacy in OLAP. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for INSE 691A (Database Security and Privacy) may not take this course for credit.
INSE 6170 Network Security Architecture and Management (4 credits)
Security architecture and management, risk and threats, security attributes and properties, security design principles, security standards, security defence toolkit, and security building blocks, corporate VoIP, residential IPTV, IMS, cloud services, security functions and their implementation, operational considerations of deployment and management of security, configuration, vulnerability management and updates, incident management, emerging challenges and innovative solutions. A project is required.
INSE 6180 Security and Privacy Implications of Data Mining (4 credits)
Introduction to data mining and its applications; privacy legislations security and privacy threats caused by current data mining techniques; risks and challenges in emerging data mining applications; attacks and prevention methods: web privacy attacks, data mining-based intrusion detection; privacy-preserving data mining; privacy-preserving data publishing. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for INSE 691D (Security Implications of Data Mining) may not take this course for credit.
INSE 6190 Wireless Network Security (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INSE 6110 or equivalent.
Introduction to wireless network security; security issues in cellular networks; authentication/key management in wireless LAN; secure handover; security in mobile IP; security issues in mobile ad-hoc networks: trust establishment, secure routing, anonymity; anonymous sensory data collection; privacy for smartphone applications. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for INSE 691B (Wireless Security) may not take this course for credit.
INSE 6210 Total Quality Methodologies in Engineering (4 credits)
Methodologies for quality engineering: six sigma, ACE (Achieving Competitive Excellence), Lean engineering, ISO9000 series; comparative study, quality clinic process charts, relentless root cause analysis, mistake proofing, market feedback analysis, process improvement and waste elimination, visual control, standard work and process management, process certification, setup reduction, total productive maintenance, DMAIC and DMADV processes, define phase, project charter, project scoping and planning, measure phase, critical to quality requirements, quality functional deployment, analyze phase, functional and process requirements, design requirements, design concepts, high-level design capability elaboration and evaluation, design phase, detailed design capability elaboration and evaluation, failure mode and effects analysis, control and verification plans, verify phase, pilot-scale processes, pilot testing and evaluation, implementation planning, full-scale processes, start-up and testing, performance evaluation, turnover to operations and maintenance, transition to process management, project closure. A project is required.
INSE 6220 Advanced Statistical Approaches to Quality (4 credits)
Introduction to quality control and total quality, statistical concepts and techniques in quality control, graphical methods for data presentation and quality improvement, statistical basis for control charts, pattern analysis in control charts, control charts for variables, control charts for individual measurements, control charts for attributes, process capability analysis, CUSUM charts and EWMA charts, acceptance sampling by attributes, acceptance plans by variables, reliability models, reliability and life testing plans, multivariate quality control, multivariate methods, aspects of multivariate analysis, multivariate normal distribution, multivariate tests of hypotheses, multivariate analysis of variance, principal components analysis, factor analysis, discrimination and classification, multivariate quality control, multivariate linear regression, design of experiments (DOE), Taguchi method, completely randomized design (CRD), randomized complete block design (RCBD), incomplete block designs, latin square designs, graeco-latin square designs, factorial designs, fractional factorial designs, split plot designs, and nested designs (compared to cross-over designs), quality in the service sector, service industries and their characteristics, model for service quality and applications. A project is required.
INSE 6230 Total Quality Project Management (4 credits)
Role of a project manager, learning and applications, project management processes, project management in quality initiatives, intellectual property protection, customer project management and critical-to-quality requirements, project planning and execution, team formation, goals, roles, procedures and interpersonal relationship, types of teams, creating a project plan, project tracking, project compliance requirements, sourcing and supplier qualification, government contract data rights, government property, risk management process, action planning, project communication, customer, team and stakeholder communications, communication planning and strategy, web-based collaboration, project management software tools. A project is required.
INSE 6240 Executive Communication (1 credit)
Communication plan elaboration, preparing presentations, developing a sound strategy, organizing for effectiveness, capturing the audience, the impromptu speech, introducing a speaker, reading a paper, leading a conference, interpersonal communication, use of voice, active listening, assertive speaking, giving and receiving feedback, assertive techniques, work styles, conflict and dispute resolution, negotiation, managing difficult situations, writing skills, interpersonal communications, business letters, formal reports, communication technology. A project is required.
INSE 6250 Quality Methodologies for Software (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INSE 6210 or equivalent, COMP 5541 or equivalent.
Quality methodologies for software, calculating sigma values, graphical analysis, quality processes for software, MAIC, DMADV, define overview, project context, initial analysis and design, lifecycle and multi-generational planning, project management, risk analysis, measure overview, customer needs, quality functional deployment for software, software metrics and requirements, scorecards, meta-models, specification languages (SDL, B, Z, etc.), software modelling (UML, Core, IDEF, etc.), graphical languages, design and verify overview, failure mode and effect analysis for software, defensive programming, smart and simple design, peer reviews, performance analysis, statistical tools, software testing, software verification. A project is required.
INSE 6260 Software Quality Assurance (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INSE 6210 or equivalent, COMP 5541 or equivalent.
Quality assurance, quality factors, components of a software quality assurance system, contract review, software development and quality plans, activities and alternatives, integration of quality activities in a project lifecycle, reviews, software inspection, software verification, testing processes, static analysis, control-flow analysis, data-flow analysis, control-flow testing, loop testing, data-flow testing, transaction-flow testing, domain testing, type-based analysis, dynamic analysis, usage models, operational profiles, result and defect analysis, reliability, performance analysis, maintenance and reverse engineering, case tools and software quality assurance. A project is required.
INSE 6270 Quality-Based Systems Engineering (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INSE 6210 or equivalent.
System engineering, quality-based system development process, acquisition and specification of system requirements, system design and prototyping, system implementation and testing, modelling languages for system engineering (SysML, IDEF, CORE, etc.), exchange mechanisms for system engineering data (AP233, XMI, etc.) gathering, specification, formulation, and refinement of system requirements, customer requirements, market requirements, technical requirements, implementation requirements, eco-requirements (scenario-based requirements gathering and refinement, affinity diagram, analytic hierarchy analysis), conflict resolution (TRIZ), management of system requirements in the design process (axiomatic design, decision tree, morphology matrix, systematic design), management of system requirements in the implementation process (six-sigma, ACE, Lean, ISO 9000, ERP, SAP, CMMS), case studies. A project is required.
INSE 6280 Quality Assurance for Systems Engineering (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INSE 6210 or equivalent, previously or concurrently.
Introduction to quality assurance and quality factors in systems engineering, components of a quality assurance system, principles of verification, validation and accreditation of systems, Vvsystem modelling languages, model semantics, techniques for V principles of system simulation (types of problems, simulation systems and their classification, principles of simulation system design and implementation), verification and validation techniques for simulation models (problem entity, conceptual model, and computerized model), development of simulation platforms, standards for system simulation, high level architecture (HLA). A project is required.
INSE 6290 Quality in Supply Chain Design (4 credits)
Evolution of supply chain, lingo, notation, master planning, role in business, performance analysis, activity profiling, strategic quality planning for supply chain, inventory planning and management (IP&M), perfect order percentage, inventory turns, fill rates and substitutions, purchase and customer order cycle times, customer service and order processing (CS&OP), network planning, supply contracts, distribution strategies, coordinated product and supply chain design, quality and innovation in product design, design for maintainability, designing for reliability, environmental considerations in supply chain design, designing quality services, make, buy, and sourcing analysis, supplier partnerships, global sourcing active assembly, supply chain management systems, efficient transportation, efficient warehousing, impact of e-commerce on supply chains, information technology and decision support systems, e-business strategies, e-business transactions, e-commerce platforms for supply chain. A project is required.
INSE 6300 Quality Assurance in Supply Chain Management (4 credits)
Supply chain management, definition, models, evolution and evaluation, quality attributes, evaluation criteria, key supply chain management issues, supply chain cost reduction opportunities, sales and operating planning hierarchy, gathering data required for sales and operation planning, inventory management techniques, effective supply chain management, supply and demand synchronization, aligning customer demands to order fulfillment, management of supply chain constraints, supply chain performance measurements, supply chain Information, communication, security, information flows, security measures, global supply chain quality and international quality standards, customer driven quality, managing supplier quality in the supply chain, the tools of quality; statistically based quality improvement for variables and attributes; managing quality improvement teams and projects. A project is required.
INSE 6310 Systems Engineering Maintenance Management (4 credits)
Maintenance concepts in engineering systems; component replacement; optimal component preventive replacement intervals; age-based replacement models for components; spare parts provision; optimal inspection decisions; condition based maintenance systems; proportional hazards model; capital equipment replacement; maintenance resource planning; reliability centered maintenance; equipment degradation analysis; degradation prediction; maintenance information system; maintenance software. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for INSE 691C (Systems Engineering Maintenance Management) may not take this course for credit.
INSE 6311 Sustainable Infrastructure Planning and Management Systems (4 credits)
This multi-disciplinary course will provide the basic knowledge for developing advanced information systems that can be used to systematically plan and manage infrastructure (e.g. roads and bridges) throughout its lifecycle, including environmental impact assessment. The course will cover the following topics: Definition and history of Infrastructure, Types and functions of Infrastructure, Infrastructure Planning, Performance Modelling, Failure Analysis and Reliability Issues, Infrastructure Inspection and Monitoring, Maintenance and Rehabilitation Strategies, Environmental Management and Sustainability Issues, and Integrated Infrastructure Management Systems. Projects.
INSE 6320 Risk Analysis for Information and Systems Engineering (4 credits)
Introduction to risk analysis theory. Risk assessment methodologies, risk assessment techniques and standards for information systems, review of probability theory, hazard identification, fault tree analysis, event tree analysis, sensitivity analysis, qualitative risk analysis, quantitative risk analysis, case studies on information systems, value analysis and integrated risk management. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for INSE 691H (Risk Analysis for Information and Systems Engineering) may not take this course for credit.
INSE 6400 Principles of Systems Engineering (4 credits)
Origins of systems engineering; modern engineering systems; structure of complex systems; systems life cycle; systems engineering management; system decomposition and architecture; systems with uncertain and imperfect information; structural and dynamics modelling; integration and evaluation: production, operation and support; systems engineering decision tools; special topics: systems of systems, sustainability, mass collaboration. A project is required.
INSE 6411 Product Design Theory and Methodology (4 credits)
This course introduces main design theories and methodologies for the conceptual and configuration design of mechanical/manufacturing systems. It includes the following topics: general design process; introduction to design theory and methodologies; user requirements analysis; structure of design problem; design concept and product configuration generation methods; evaluation of design concepts and product configuration; sources and resolution strategies of design conflicts; computer-assistance of all these tasks; and case studies of product design. A project is required.
INSE 6421 Systems Integration and Testing (4 credits)
Introduction to integration and testing of complex systems; fundamentals of project planning; process analysis; workflow modelling; six sigma tools and methodologies for systems integration; formulation of systems operational assessment and concept; systems architecture, functions and capabilities composition and packaging into high-level system architecture; modelling and analysis methods for representing system functionality and capability; interface description and management; testability and interoperability testing; management issues pertaining to integrated product teams, vendors, suppliers, and subcontractors. A project is required.
INSE 6431 Ad Hoc Wireless Networks: Architectures and Protocols (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6851, COMP 6461 or equivalent.
Design, provisioning and management of ad hoc wireless networks. Concepts, architectures and protocols related to the efficient design and high performance of ad hoc wireless networks. Medium access control schemes; mathematical analysis. Analysis of access protocols in multihop networks; derive the system capacity. Study of various control knobs for improving the network capacity; power control, physical carrier sense turning, rate control, interference mitigation, and channel diversity. Study emerging issues such as supporting quality of service in wireless networks; security issues in wireless networks, broadband wireless access; wireless mesh networks; their integration with wired networks; vehicular ad hoc networks and related protocols. A project is required.
INSE 6441 Applied Game Theory and Mechanism Design (4 credits)
Fundamentals of game theory; equilibrium concepts; strategic games; extensive games; Bayesian games; game strategies in network security; game theory for trust and reputation; fundamentals of mechanism design; optimal mechanisms; efficient mechanisms; incentive compatibility; incentives and information security; revelation principle and trust; analysis tools; applications: security protocols, supply chain, trust and reputation, social networks. A project is required.
INSE 6510 Video Game Technology and Development (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COMP 5511 or equivalent, previously or concurrently.
This course is part development and part technology, and will cover the process of commercial video game development, and software design patterns used for game design. The course provides an in-depth understanding of how the game design process works. Students work with a game engine software framework to design and implement several kinds of games. Video game history. Basic Building blocks of a game. Elements of game design. Game Maker: objects, sprites, events. Space Shooter. Developing games with Games Factory. Real Time Strategy game development. A project is required.
INSE 6530 3D Graphics and Computer Animation for Game Design (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COMP 6761 or equivalent, previously or concurrently.
Application of 3D graphics and animation topics to non real-time rendered media. Current research topics in computer animation such as dynamic simulation of flexible and rigid objects, automatically-generated control systems, and evolution of behaviours. History of Animation. Animation Basics. Keyframe Animation. Path Animation. Non-Linear Animation. Modelling Concerns for Animation. Rigging for Forward and Inverse Kinematics. Morphing. Expressions. Particle Systems. Dynamics. A project is required.
INSE 6610 Cybercrime Investigations (4 credits)
Introduction to cybercrimes: unauthorized access, mischief to data, possession of hacking tools, possession of child pornography; Legal aspects: Canadian judicial system, computer crime laws, charter of rights, common law, mutual legal assistance treaty, search warrants, production and assistance orders, international laws, upcoming legal changes; Investigation process: search planning, acquisition methods, environment recognition, evidence identification; Reporting process: investigation and analysis reports, notes taking; authority of seizure; forensic interviews; Computer crime trials: witness preparation, court sentencing, rebuttal witness, cross-examination, testimony, credibility attacks; in-depth case studies. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for INSE 691E (Cybercrime Investigations) may not take this course for credit.
INSE 6620 Cloud Computing Security and Privacy (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INSE 6110 or equivalent.
Cloud computing concepts, SOA and cloud, virtualization and cloud, cloud service delivery models, cloud storage models, cloud deployment scenarios, public/ private/ hybrid/ community cloud, cloud computing architectures, SaaS, PaaS, IaaS, agility, scalability and elasticity of cloud, cloud security, cloud privacy, homomorphic encryption, searching encrypted cloud data, secure data outsourcing, secure computation outsourcing, proof of data possession / retrievability, virtual machine security, trusted computing in clouds, cloud-centric regulatory compliance, business and security risk models, cloud user security, identity management in cloud, SAML, applications of secure cloud computing.
INSE 6630 Recent Developments in Information Systems Security (4 credits)
Prerequisites: Any two of INSE 6110, INSE 6120, INSE 6130, or INSE 6140.
Security and privacy legislations. New security threats and solution on personal computers, enterprise computers, personal information, confidential information, identity fraud, financial fraud, and social networking. Recent developments in trusted computing for critical cyber infrastructure, privacy-aware information sharing, cybercrime, and cyber forensics techniques. Cyber espionage, cyber terrorism, and cyber war. A project is required.
INSE 6640 Smart Grids and Control System Security (4 credits)
Overview of electric grid operation, evolution to the smart grid, smart grid components, dynamic pricing, promotion of “green” resources, governmental regulation, network standards, consumer privacy, risks to the smart grid, physical security and protections against tampering for smart grid environments, device level security, authorization and access control, consumer privacy protection, cryptographic mechanisms for smart grid environments, secure key management, communication security in smart grid, privacy of user data for Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI), security standards for smart grid, supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA), SCADA architecture, SCADA Security, SCADA monitoring, SCADA systems for smart grids, distributed control systems (DCS), communication infrastructure. A project is required.
INSE 6650 Trusted Computing (4 credits)
Hardware and software root of trust; establishing and attesting trust of software systems; Trusted Platform Module (TPM); CPU support for trusted computing, including existing technologies such as Intel Trusted Execution Technology (TXT), AMD Secure Virtual Machine (SVM), ARM TrustZone; secure crypto processors such as Hardware Security Modules (HSMs); bank HSM APIs and their weaknesses; attestation protocols; OS support for trusted computing; security tokens (e.g., second factor of authentication, smartcards, transaction verification code); trusted user interface; use cases: digital rights management (DRM), authentication, protected execution of security sensitive code, trusted kiosk computing, full disk encryption, malware exploiting trusted computing infrastructure; hardware and software attacks; privacy issues. A project is required.
INSE 6660 Secure Programming (4 credits)
Topics include fundamentals of secure programming; string-related vulnerabilities and defence. Pointer-related vulnerabilities and defence; memory management-related vulnerabilities and defence. Integer-related security issues; formatted output-related security issues; concurrency-related security issues; security vulnerabilities and linking; security in sockets programming; security vulnerabilities and signals; file I/O security; best practices and coding standards; design principles for secure programming; model-based secure programming; static analysis for secure programming. A project is required.
INSE 6670 Embedded Systems Security (4 credits)
Topics of this course include embedded and real-time embedded systems; embedded systems security and trust; monitoring of embedded systems; security and protection objectives for hardware; adversaries, attacks; trusted integrated circuits (TIC); hardware assisted security and trust; process reliability and security; secure program execution on embedded processors; networks on chip; secure memory access; hardware trusted platforms; secure processors; efficient security processing; energy efficient security; cryptographic processors; physical one-way functions (POWF); PUF-based security; FSM model of computation; hiding information in FSM/IC piracy protection by active hardware metering; remote enabling and disabling of ICs; watermarking for intellectual property protection (IPP); physical and invasive attacks, side-channel attacks; zero knowledge proofs; FPGA security; FPGA fingerprinting and access; hardware trojan horses. Applications (automotive domain, internet of things, cyber-physical systems, SCADA, sensor networks). A project is required.
INSE 6680 Systems Physical Security (4 credits)
Topics of this course include identifying potential security threats and vulnerabilities, threat and risk assessment; security equipment and systems (access control and biometrics technology, surveillance systems, network infrastructure supporting security technology); physical security of information systems; maximizing the value of security systems; securing transported materials; emergency management and risk mitigation; critical infrastructure protection. Overview of the Canadian Operational Standard on Physical Security, Policy on Government Security and U.S. National Response Framework. A project is required.
INSE 691 Topics in Information Systems Engineering (4 credits)
Note: Subject will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for these courses providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g., INSE 691A, INSE 691B, etc.
INSE 6961 Graduate Seminar in Information and Systems Engineering (1 credit)
Students must attend a set of seminars identified by the Concordia Institute for Information Systems Engineering and submit a comprehensive report on the topics presented in three of the seminars. This course is graded on a pass/fail basis.
INSE 7100 Design and Analysis of Security Protocols (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COEN 6311 or equivalent.
The primary objective of this course is to present the methods used in the design and analysis of modern security protocols, introduction to existing cryptographic protocols. The most important security proprieties (such as authentication, secrecy, integrity, availability, atomicity, certified delivery and other properties), flaw taxonomy (such as freshness attacks, type attacks, parallel session attacks, implementation dependent attacks, binding attacks, encapsulation attacks and other forms of attack). Cryptographic protocol specification (general-purpose formal languages, logical languages, operational languages and security calculi). Cryptographic protocol analysis (security logics analysis, model-based and algebraic analysis, process algebra analysis, type based analysis). Limitations of formal methods and ad-hoc techniques, project will be offered in analyzing a number of published cryptographic protocols. The focus of this course will be on the design and the analysis of security protocols. A project is required.
INSE 7110 Value Added Service Engineering in Next Generation Networks (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6861 or equivalent.
Telecommunications service engineering, or more simply service engineering, is the discipline that addresses the technologies and engineering process for the specification, implementation, testing, deployment, usage of value added services in telecommunication networks, value added services, or more simply services, can be defined as anything that goes beyond two party voice calls. They are either call related (e.g. call diversion, multiparty gaming, conducted conferences) or non-call related (e.g. customized stock quotes, web surfing from a cellular phone). Some services may combine call related and non-call related features (e.g. call centres). This course will cover the basics of service engineering (such as basic concepts, value added services, service life cycle, service engineering, intelligent networks, WAP/Imode/TINE-C). The basics of next generation networks (such as session initiation protocol (SIP), H.323, Megaco, H.248, 3GPP/3GPP2 architecture, softswitch). Signaling protocol-specific approaches (such as H.232 supplementary services, SIP CGI, SIP servlet API). Signaling protocol neutral approaches (such as CPL, JAIN JCC/JCAT, PARLAY; web services). Approaches at the research stage (such as context awareness; mobile code-based approaches). A project is required.
INSE 7120 Advanced Network Management (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6861 or equivalent.
Network management – basics (history and basic definitions, management frameworks, functional areas). The simple network management protocol framework (history, protocol architecture, functional architecture, information architecture, RMON, management by delegation, distributed management and JASMIN NIB, case studies). OSI systems management, TNM and other frameworks (OSI communication, information and functional models, TMN functional, physical and information architecture, case study, CORBA based management, web based management, DTMF, JMX). Interoperability issue and in-depth study of a specific functional area overview of known techniques (e.g. dual MIBs), alarm filtering techniques (e.g. artificial intelligence), alarm correlation techniques (e.g. artificial intelligence, coding theory). Approaches still a research level (mobile agent based network management, active network based network management, policy based artwork management, use of SML/web services). A project is required.
INSE 8901 Master of Applied Science Research and Thesis (25 credits)
Students must complete a 25-credit thesis as part of their degree requirements. The thesis must represent the results of the student’s independent work after admission to the program. The proposed topic for the thesis, together with a brief statement outlining the proposed method of treatment, and the arrangement made for faculty supervision, must be approved by the GCS  Graduate Studies Committee. For purposes of registration, this work will be designated as INSE 8901. The thesis will be evaluated by the student’s supervisor(s), and at least two examiners appointed by the GCS Graduate Studies Committee, one of whom shall be external to the student’s department.
Mechanical, Industrial and Aerospace Engineering
INDU 691 Topics in Industrial Engineering (4 credits)
Note: Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for these courses provided that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. INDU 691A, INDU 691B, etc.
INDU 6111 Theory of Operations Research (4 credits)
This course introduces the fundamentals of convex analysis such as polyhedral sets and the representation theorem. Advanced topics in linear optimization are also covered, such as state-of-the-art solution methods (revised and dual simplex methods, path following interior point methods), duality theory and parametric analysis, Farkas lemma, and KKT optimality conditions. An introduction to other advanced topics (Dantzig-Wolfe decomposition, dynamic programming, and stochastic decision processes) is given. A project is required.
INDU 6121 Applied Optimization (4 credits)
Topics include model building in optimization, model validation, economic interpretation, sensitivity analysis, algorithms and commercial optimization software for problem solving. Mathematical models in deterministic and nondeterministic settings with linear, integer, and nonlinear programming formulations are developed. Applications of optimization models in production, transportation, finance, scheduling, and healthcare systems are presented. A project is required.
INDU 6131 Graph Theory with System Applications (4 credits)
Basic concepts; trees, circuits and cutsets; Eulerian and Hamiltonian graphs; directed graphs; matrices of a graph, graphs and vector spaces; planarity and duality; connectivity, matching and colouring; flows in networks: max-flow min-cut theorem, minimum cost flows; optimization on graphs: minimum-cost spanning trees, optimum branching and shortest paths. Project: two hours per week.
Note: Students who have taken ENGR 6111 may not receive credit for this course.
INDU 6141 Logistics Network Models (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INDU 6121.
This course covers the following wide range of operational issues in the transportation and logistics industry. Different analytical models and their solution strategies are also introduced. Overview of transportation systems including airlines, railways, ocean liners, cargo, energy transportation and pipelines; Supply chain characterization; Site location;Distribution planning; Vehicle routing; Fleet scheduling; Crew scheduling; Demand management; Replenishment management; Revenue management; Geographic information systems; Real-time network control issues. A project is required.
INDU 6151 Decision Models in Service Sector (*) (4 credits)
Introduction to service strategy and operations. Service demand forecasting and development of new services. Service facility location and layout planning. Applications of decision models in service operations and service quality control. Cost analysis, queuing models, risk management and resource allocation models for service decisions. Service outsourcing and supply chain issues. Efficiency and effectiveness issues in different service sectors such as emergency force deployment, municipal resource allocation and health care. Case studies using operations research, operations management, and statistical techniques. A project is required.
INDU 6161 Design and Operations of Supply Chain Networks (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INDU 6121.
This course analyzes various supply chain operation issues from an engineering point of view. The course covers topics such as: supply chain issues and opportunities; performance evaluation of supply chains; supply chain planning and optimization; collaborative decision making in supply chains; transportation planning in supply chains; capacity planning in supply chains; designing global supply chains; risk management in supply chains; sustainable supply chain management. A project is required.
INDU 6211 Production Systems and Inventory Control (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INDU 6121.
This course covers various operational and planning issues in manufacturing industry: Integrated production planning and control. Large scale model development for demand forecasting, materials requirements planning and manufacturing resource planning (MRP/MRPII), production-inventory systems, production planning; models for line balancing, lot sizing, dispatching, scheduling, releasing. Models for inventory control, determination of order quantities and safety stocks, inventory replenishment systems. Supply chain management. Just-in-Time systems, lean and Agile manufacturing. A project is required.
INDU 6221 Lean Enterprise (4 credits)
This course covers topics that are necessary to establish a lean culture at the system level in various organizations:Introduction to principles of the lean enterprise, process management, waste elimination and process variation, five S’s and workplace organization, lean analysis tools and performance measurements, Lean Six Sigma, enterprise value stream mapping, visual workplace, lean product development, lean business administration. A project is required.
INDU 6231 Scheduling Theory (4 credits)
Models for sequencing and scheduling activities including: static and dynamic problems; deterministic and stochastic models. Single machine processing; parallel machine processing; multistage problems including flow-shops and job-shops. Complexity issues. Exact and heuristic solution methods. Average and worst case performance analysis of heuristic methods. Applications in manufacturing environments. Current research trends. Project: two hours per week.
Note: Students who have taken ENCS 6201 may not receive credit for this course.
INDU 6241 Lean Manufacturing (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INDU 6211.
Introduction to the basic principles and concepts of lean manufacturing; tools of lean manufacturing, including value stream mapping, standardized work, setup reduction; mapping the current state; mixed model value streams; mapping the future state; Takt time, finished goods strategy, continuous flow, level pull, pacemaker, pitch, interval; implementing the future state. A project is required.
INDU 6251 Facilities Planning and Warehouse Operations (4 credits)
This course is designed to provide advanced concepts, theory and procedures for the study of facilities location, physical layouts, material flow, and material handling, warehouse operations planning and management systems, warehouse design, automation and control. Analytical procedures are developed to enhance the decision-making process in the design, rationalization and improvement of manufacturing or service facilities. The knowledge learned in this course is integrated with knowledge from related courses to develop a design project. A project is required.
INDU 6310 Applied Probability and Statistics for Engineers (4 credits)
This course introduces probability and statistics concepts frequently used in engineering applications. Probability theory, randomness, conditional probability, joint probability, independence and probability distributions are covered. Data collection, sampling, confidence intervals, hypothesis formulation, errors, estimation topics are given. Linear and  non-linear regression, analysis of residuals and remedial measures, transformation of data, multiple, polynomial and weighted regression, model selection techniques, and joint confidence regions concepts are taught with relevant industry applications. Statistical packages are introduced. A project is required.
Note: This course may not be taken by MASc and PhD students for credit.
INDU 6311 Discrete System Simulation (4 credits)
Probability theory and queuing theory; discrete and continuous variables and their distributions; deterministic and stochastic models; building valid and credible models. Computer simulation of discrete-change systems subject to uncertainty techniques to verify quality of input data; analysis of output data; determination of simulation run-length and number of replications; random number generations, variance reduction techniques, transient and steady state behaviour; comparison of alternative systems. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken ENGR 6491 may not receive credit for this course.
INDU 6321 Introduction to Six Sigma (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INDU 6331.
Overview of the Six Sigma concept; Six Sigma deployment practice; Six Sigma methodologies for process improvement and process (DMAIC) and for product design (DMADV); Integration of Lean techniques in Six Sigma (Lean Six Sigma); Overview of different quality management tools applied in Six Sigma; Application of Designed of Experiments in Six Sigma; Design for Six Sigma through the application of the Robust Parameter Design; Six Sigma project management. A project is required.
INDU 6331 Advanced Quality Control (4 credits)
Introduction to advanced quality control and improvement concepts. Fundamentals of statistical methods and theoretical basis for quality control methods. Advanced and newly developed quality control and improvement methods such as modified and acceptance charts, multiple stream process control, control charts with adaptive sampling and engineering process control for quality. International standards of acceptance sampling. Economic design and implications of quality control and improvement procedures. A project is required.
INDU 6341 Advanced Concepts in Quality Improvement (*) (4 credits) The foundations of modern quality improvement, scientific basis of quality engineering, statistical experimental design issues such as randomized blocks, factorial designs at two levels, fractional factorial designs at two levels, applications on factorial designs, building models, and explanation and critique of Taguchi’s contributions. A project on selected topics is required.
Note: Students who have taken MECH 6461 may not receive credit for this course.
INDU 6351 System Reliability (4 credits)
Review of probability theory; definition of various measures (reliability, availability, MTTF, etc.) and related probability distributions; reliability evaluation of redundant systems (series, parallel, series-parallel, bridge network, etc.); two and three parameter Weibull analysis; failure data analysis; trend analysis; goodness of fit test (Kolmogorov/Smirnov test); introduction of stress-strength modelling; homogeneous Markov models; reliability evaluation of cold, warm, and hot standby systems; introduction to reliability testing; case studies. Knowledge of a first course in probability theory is assumed. Project: two hours per week.
Note: Students who have taken ENGR 6451 may not receive credit for this course.
INDU 6361 Discrete Optimization (4 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the instructor.
Topics include mathematical modelling of industrial and service systems by integer programming (IP); choices in model formulations; optimality, relaxations and bounds; well-solved problems in IP; computational complexity; branch-and-bound methods; polyhedral theory and cutting plane algorithms; Lagrangean duality; software for solving IPs; other optimization techniques. A project is required.
INDU 6371 Stochastic Optimization (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INDU 6111.
Topics include an overview of stochastic optimization models; two-stage and multi-stage stochastic programming; algorithms for solving large-scale stochastic programming models, including sample average approximation (SAA), L-shaped method and scenario decomposition algorithms; robust optimization approach. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for the course INDU 691X (Stochastic Optimization) may not take this course for credit.
INDU 6381 Applications of Reliability Engineering (4 credits)
Topics include an introduction to reliability function; reliability program; failure; requirement allocation and design optimization; painless risk management; design optimization by test; validation; durability; stressstrength; nuisances and no fault found (NFF); operating with failure; fail-safe and operating with failure; real-time health monitoring. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken INDU 691 (Application of Reliability Engineering) may not receive credit for this course.
INDU 6391 Reliability and Maintenance for Design and Manufacturing (4 credits)
Topics include fundamentals of product design and system validation methodologies to establish maintenance programs; design of experiment, test for design validation, pass/fail analysis, reliability growth models, reliability centred maintenance, test for manufacturing; accelerated life and stress tests; failure reporting, analysis and corrective action systems (FRACAS), maintenance programs, lifecycle analysis, end-of-life analysis and industrial approach for reliability; concepts and topics will be covered through real-life case studies. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken INDU 691 (Reliability and Maintenance for Design and Manufacturing) may not receive credit for this course.
INDU 6411 Human Factors Engineering (*) (4 credits)
Elements of anatomy, physiology and psychology; auditory and visual display engineering; engineering anthropometry; human capabilities and limitations; manual material handling: design of work places, human-machine system design; shift work and jet lag; acquisition and retention of skill; toxicity and hazard; human reliability. A project on a current topic is required.
Note: Students who have taken MECH 6251 may not receive credit for this course.
INDU 6421 Systems Safety Engineering and Management (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INDU 6310.
This course covers a variety of topics in safety engineering that provide the necessary knowledge and skills in order for engineers to design and manage systems where life-critical components will perform as expected, even when sub-components fail. Design concepts for safe operation with failure, design for human error and design for availability are introduced. Generic and safety dedicated engineering techniques are taught. Common safety management architectures for service and manufacturing systems, existing safety standards, guidelines in different industries, and their impact on the design processes across the life cycle of a product from initial concept to continuous certification are included. A project is required.
INDU 6521 Quantitative Methods in Healthcare Systems (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INDU 6121.
Topics include mathematical modeling and optimization methods in healthcare problems, healthcare staff planning and scheduling, operating room management, and appointment scheduling in clinics. Other operational issues such as production and delivery of radio-pharmaceuticals, resource allocation and capacity planning in hospitals, ambulance redeployment and dispatching are discussed. Finally, system-level healthcare planning and management tools and methods such as routing and scheduling of caregivers in home-health industries, healthcare facility location, inventory management of blood products, kidney exchange optimization and optimization in radiation therapy (intensity-modulated radiation - IMRT and volumetric modulated arc therapy - VMAT) are introduced. A project is required.
INDU 6611 Applied Industrial Systems Analytics (4 credits)
Prerequisites: INDU 6121,6310.
The course covers Analytics as it is divided into three categories according to functional classification of analytics methods: descriptive, predictive, and prescriptive. By taking  a hands-on teaching approach, graduate students are taught a set of techniques of descriptive and predictive analytics, which emphasizes extensive analysis of real (or realistic) data sets from a variety of organizations such as manufacturing, service and healthcare using statistical packages. Students are also taught techniques for proper visualization and presentation of the results of their analysis. Specific analytics methods such as logistic regression, time series, decision trees, support vector machines, k-nearest neighbors, k-means are covered. A project is required.
INDU 6990 Industrial Engineering Capstone (9 credits)
Prerequisite: A minimum of 16 credits must be completed in the program.
A supervised design, simulation or experimental capstone design project in the students’ area of specialization. Students may work in groups to undertake:
A project with a company, governmental organization, or a NGO, supervised jointly by a faculty member and a member of the partner organization;
An engineering design that has potential to be commercialized, where a faculty member or District 3 representative supervises the project.
Students may also opt to tackle a research problem under the supervision of a faculty member.
A written report and a public presentation is required. Final report must include a detailed description of the industry experience or the research problem and clearly outline the engineering analysis. This is a two-term course (Fall and Winter only).
Note: Students cannot take this course for credit towards MASc or PhD degrees.
INDU 6991 Engineering Management Industrial Stage I (8 Credits)
Prerequisite: A minimum of 16 credits must be completed in the program.
The Industrial Stage I is designed to provide students with the opportunity to complete an engineering management project in a company, governmental organization, or a NGO under the supervision of an organization partner and a faculty member. Students are required to provide a written report and give a seminar.
Note: Students cannot take this course for credit towards MASc or PhD degrees.
INDU 6992 Engineering Management Industrial Stage II (8 Credits)
Prerequisite: INDU 6991.
The Industrial Stage II is designed to provide students with the additional opportunity to complete the second engineering management project in a company, governmental organization, or a NGO under the supervision of an organization partner and a faculty member. Students are required to provide a written report and give a seminar.
Note: Students cannot take this course for credit towards MASc or PhD degrees.
MECH 6011 Analysis and Design of Pneumatic Systems (4 credits)
Principles and operating characteristics of fluidic elements; modelling of wall attachment; beam deflection; turbulent and vortex amplifiers; design and analysis of microdiaphram and diaphram ejector amplifiers; methods of evaluation performance characteristics of fluid devices; passive fluidic elements; digital and analog fluidic circuit theories and their applications; case studies of fluidic systems. A project on selected topics is required.
MECH 6021 Design of Industrial Control Systems (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6101 or equivalent.
Analog and digital control system design. Analog controller design methods: lead and lag compensators, pole placement, model matching, two-parameter configuration, plant input/output feedback configuration. Introduction to state-space control system. State estimator and state feedback. Introduction to digital control system. Z-transform. Difference equations. Stability in the Z-domain. Digital implementation of analog controllers. Equivalent digital plant method. Alias signals. Selection of sampling time. PID controller. A project on specific topic or applications is required.
MECH 6041 Virtual Systems Engineering (4 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the instructor.
Theory and application of virtual systems with an emphasis on virtual prototyping of mechanical systems. Virtual system modelling: particle systems, rigid body systems, lumped parameter models, and multi-domain system modelling. Non-real-time simulation methods: numerical integration methods, stiff systems and implicit methods. Hardware-in-the-loop simulation (HIL): Real-time simulation, multi-rate simulation and scheduling. Stability, invariance, and robustness. Virtual environments. Distributed simulation and time delay analysis. Design and analysis of virtual engineering systems: specification, design, verification, validation and prototype testing. A project is required.
MECH 6051 Process Dynamics and Control (*) (4 credits)
Dynamics of mechanical and chemical processes: linear and nonlinear system capacity, resistance, piping complexes; characteristics and dynamics of control valves; process time constants; proportional, reset and derivative control actions; feed forward and cascade control, direct digital control case studies on design of level control; p-4 control and heat exchanger control; analysis of industrial hazards and security. A project on selected topics of current interest is required.
MECH 6061 Analysis and Design of Hydraulic Control Systems (*) (4 credits)
Introduction to fluid power control technology; fundamentals of fluid transmission media; basic hydraulic control system components and circuits; hydraulic servosystems; modelling and dynamic analysis of hydraulic systems – design examples; basic pneumatic control system components and circuits – design examples. A projects on selected topics is required.
MECH 6081 Fuel Control Systems for Combustion Engines (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6201.
Introduction to fuel control systems for combustion engines with fuel injection. Dynamics of fuel injection for steady-state and transient process; injection characteristics for different combustion patterns; speed and power control in relation to engine characteristics; design principles of fuel systems; special requirements for starting, shut-down, schedule modulation; testing methods; wear and reliability problems. Case studies include: multicylinder in-line injection pump, rotary distributor injection pump, mecano-pneumatic fuel control unit. Full term project work on alternative fuel delivery systems and emissions control for combustion engines. Modelling and simulation. Demonstration of alternative fuel injection system on diesel engine in lab.
MECH 6091 Flight Control Systems (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6101 or equivalent.
Basics of flight dynamics modelling: axes systems and notation; equations of motion; aerodynamic forces and moments, airplane stability, aircraft on the ground; simulator flight model design. Flight instruments: classification; principles of operation, cockpit displays. Flight controls basics: configuration; control forces; primary and secondary controls. Introduction to automatic flight control: stability augmentation; autopilots; flight guidance and flight management systems; design examples. Flight simulation: classification; standards and regulations; system configuration and components. Projects on selected topics are required.
MECH 6101 Kinetic Theory of Gases (4 credits)
Equations of state for gases; molecular explanation of equations of state; introduction to quantum mechanics; the molecular theory of thermal energy and heat capacity; molecular velocity distribution, molecular collisions and the transport properties of gases, introduction to chemical kinetics. A project on specific topic or applications is required.
MECH 6111 Gas Dynamics (*) (4 credits)
Combined effects in one-dimensional flow; multidimensional flow; method of characteristics; one-dimensional treatment of non-steady gas dynamics; shock wave interactions; instability phenomena of supersonic intake diffusers; shock-boundary layer interactions. Projects on unsteady gas dynamics and on shock wave propagation and interactions are required.
MECH 6121 Aerodynamics (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6201.
Flow conservation equations, incompressible Navier-Stokes equations, inviscid irrotational and rotational flows: the Euler equations, the potential and stream function equations. Kelvin, Stokes and Helmholtz theorems. Elementary flows and their superposition, panel method for non-lifting bodies. Airfoil and wing characteristics, aerodynamics forces and moments coefficients. Flow around thin airfoils, Biot-Savart law, vortex sheets. Flow around thick airfoils, the panel method for lifting bodies. Flow around wings, Prandtl’s lifting line theory, induced angle and downwash, unswept wings, swept compressibility correction rules, the area rule. Transonic flow: small disturbance equation, full potential equation, supercritical airfoils. A project on specific topic or applications is required.
MECH 6131 Conduction and Radiation Heat Transfer (4 credits)
Solutions by analytical, numerical, and analogue methods of steady and transient temperature fields with and without heat sources; introduction to convection. Basic concepts and relations of radiation heat transfer, radiation of strongly absorbing media, and radiation of weakly absorbing media. A project on selected topics is required.
MECH 6141 Heat Exchanger Design (4 credits)
Review of heat transfer and flow losses; design consideration of heat exchangers; double pipe exchanger; shell and tube exchanger; extended surfaces; condenser, evaporator, regenerator, cooling tower. A project on selected topics is required.
MECH 6161 Gas Turbine Design (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: MECH 6171.
Study of practical criteria which influence the design of a gas turbine engine including relevant mechanical and aerodynamic constraints. The aerodynamics of each of the three major components of a modern turbo-fan engine, namely the compressor, the combustor and the turbine is considered. Air system acoustics, engine aerodynamic matching of components and modern performance testing methods. A design project is assigned for each of these components. A project on specific topic or applications is required.
MECH 6171 Turbomachinery and Propulsion (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6201.
Review of the gas turbine engine cycle and components arrangement. Types of turbo-propulsion for aircraft: turboprop, turbofan and turbojet. Energy transfer in incompressible and compressible turbomachines: the Euler equation, velocity triangles. Axial-flow compressors; mean-line analysis. Mechanisms of losses in turbomachines. Three-dimensional motion in turbomachines; the radial equilibrium equation and its numerical solution by finite difference methods. Dimensional analysis of incompressible and compressible flow in turbomachines, compressor and turbine performance maps; surge and stall. Centrifugal compressors. Axial-flow turbines. Prediction of performance of gas turbines, components matching. Projects on selected topics are required.
MECH 6181 Heating, Air Conditioning and Ventilation (*) (4 credits)
The effect of air temperature, humidity and purity on physiological comfort; overall heat transmission coefficients of building sections, air infiltration, ventilation and solar radiation loads; heating and air conditioning load calculations; heating, air conditioning and ventilating systems, equipment and controls; design of hot water piping and air distribution systems, pressure drop calculations; selection and specifications of mechanical equipment for heating, ventilation and air conditioning applications. A project on selected applications is required.
MECH 6191 Combustion (4 credits)
Prerequisite: MECH 6111.
Chemical thermodynamics; review of chemical kinetics; conservation equations for multicomponent reacting systems; detonation and deflagration of premixed materials; premixed laminar flames; gaseous diffusion flames, droplet combustion; turbulent flames; two-phase reacting systems; chemically reacting boundary layers. Projects on selected topics are required.
MECH 6231 Helicopter Flight Dynamics (4 credits)
Prerequisites: ENGR 6311 and MECH 6121, previously or concurrently.
Fundamental aspects of helicopter technology; rotary wing aerodynamics; aeromechanical stability; hover and forward flight performance; ground and air resonance; introduction to vibration and structural dynamic problems in helicopter; case studies in the rotorcraft field. Case studies and projects on selected topics are required.
MECH 6241 Operational Performance of Aircraft (4 credits)
Prerequisite: MECH 6121.
Introduction to fixed-wing aircraft operation. Flying environment and its measurement by aircraft instrumentation. Computation of lift and drag, effects of viscosity and compressibility. Review of piston, turboprop, turbojet and turbofan powerplants. Operational performance of aircraft in climb, cruise, descent and on ground. Advanced aircraft systems. Operational considerations in aircraft design. Projects on selected topics are required.
MECH 6251 Space Flight Mechanics and Propulsion Systems (4 credits)
Prerequisite: MECH 6111 or permission of the instructor.
Classification of space propulsion systems; Tsiolkovskij’s equation; ideal rocket and nozzle design; flight performance; basic orbital mechanics; chemical propellant rocket performance analysis; fundamentals of liquid and solid propellant rocket motors; electric, solar, fusion thruster. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken MECH 7221 may not receive credit for this course.
MECH 6301 Vibration Problems in Rotating Machinery (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6311.
Torsional vibrations critical speeds, rotors driven by reciprocating machines, finite element modelling, whirling of shafts, gyroscopic effects, rotors on fluid film bearings, instability in torsional and bending vibrations, balancing, response to support excitations, condition monitoring. Projects on selected applications are required.
MECH 6311 Noise and Vibration Control (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6311.
Introduction to noise and vibration, measurement units. Review of wave theory, noise control criteria and standards, sources and nature of mechanical equipment noise, devices for noise control such as silencers, baffles and acoustic enclosures. Machinery vibration sources, radiation of noise from vibrating structures, devices and methods for vibration control such as isolators, dampers, absorbers and in-situ balancing. Active control of noise and vibration. Projects on selected applications are required.
MECH 6321 Optimum Design of Mechanical Systems (4 credits)
Survey of practical methods for optimum design of mechanical systems; optimal performance criteria and selection of design variables. Introduction to analytical and numerical optimization methods for single- and multi-variable unconstrained problems: direct search and gradient methods. Constrained optimization. Optimality criterion techniques for mechanical systems. Case studies in the area of machine tools, structural systems, machine element design, vehicle design, and hydraulic control systems. Discussion on commercial software packages, their capability, availability and limitations. An optimization project on selected topics is required.
MECH 6341 Engineering Analysis of Smart Materials and Structures (4 credits)
Topics include introduction to smart materials and structures; overview of mathematical models for mechanical and electrical systems; mathematical representation of smart systems; piezoelectric materials and their constitutive equations; electromechanical coupling in piezoelectric based systems and structures and their governing equations; shape memory alloys and their constitutive models; electrical activation of shape memory alloys and their dynamic modelling; electrorheological (ER) and magnetorheological (MR) fluids and elastomers; constitutive models for ER and MR fluids and elastomers; dynamic modelling and vibration analysis of ER and MR based adaptive devices and structures; application of smart materials as energy dissipating elements in structural systems for passive, semi-active and active vibration control; application of smart materials in motion control. A project is required.
MECH 6351 Modal Analysis of Mechanical Systems (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6311.
Natural frequencies and normal modes of multi-degree-of-freedom systems; orthogonality of normal modes; eigenvalue and eigenvector extraction methods; vibration response using normal mode analysis; complex natural frequencies and complex modes in damped systems, modal damping random response considerations; nonsymmetric systems using biorthogonality relations; modal parameter identification from tests, application of modal analysis to mechanical systems. Projects on selected applications are required.
MECH 6361 Mechanics of Biological Tissues (4 credits)
The course deals with mechanical behaviour of tissues in human body such as bone, cartilage, ligaments, tendons, blood vessels, muscles, skin, teeth, nerves. Classification of biological tissues; mechanical properties in vivo and in vitro testing; constitutive relationships, viscoelastic behaviour and rate/time dependency; remodelling and adaption due to mechanical loading; analogous mechanical systems. A project on current topic is required.
MECH 6421 Metal Machining and Surface Technology (4 credits)
Theoretical and practical aspects of mechanics and dynamics of metal machining; tool geometry in machine and working reference systems with their transformation matrices; machinability; wear; cutting forces; temperature distribution; tool material unconventional machining; machining economics; optimizing techniques for cutting conditions; surface mechanics and application of random processes. A project on selected topics is required.
MECH 6431 Introduction to Tribology (Wear, Friction and Lubrication) (4 credits)
Contact between stationary surfaces; dry friction; rolling contract; wear; boundary lubrication; lubricating oils and greases; hydrodynamic journal bearings; case studies in Tribology as applied to design and manufacturing problems. A project on specific topic or applications is required.
MECH 6441 Stress Analysis in Mechanical Design (4 credits)
Stress analysis for design of elastic and visco-elastic mechanical components subject to thermal, fatigue, vibrational and chemical environments; buckling and creep; cumulative damage. Case studies, and project from selected applications are required.
MECH 6451 Computer-Aided Mechanical Design (4 credits)
Concept of value and decision theory in design; design application and case studies in the implementation of digital computer-oriented design of engineering systems. Examples include design of specific machine elements, design of vehicle suspension, hydraulic positioning systems, ship propulsion system, multi-speed gear box, and cam drives. Introduction to identification, optimization, and parameter sensitivity. Implementation of these methods uses remote terminals and graphic display units. A project is required.
MECH 6471 Aircraft Structures (4 credits)
Prerequisite: MECH 6441 or equivalent.
Aero/performance aspects of aircraft structures; Airworthiness and design considerations; Materials; Static, vibratory and aeroelastic loadings; Propulsion-induced loadings; Functions and fabrication of structural components; Stress analysis of wings, fuselages, stringers, fuselage frames, wing ribs, cut-outs in wings and fuselages, and laminated structures; Buckling of aircraft structures: local buckling, instability of stiffened panels; flexural-torsional buckling; Fracture and fatigue failures. Case studies.
MECH 6481 Aeroelasticity (*) (4 credits)
Aerodynamic loading of elastic airfoils; phenomenon of divergence; effect of flexible control surface on divergence of main structure; divergence of one- and two-dimensional wing models; phenomenon of flutter; flutter of two- and three-dimensional wings; approximate analysis techniques; flutter prevention and control; panel flutter in high speed vehicles; flutter of turbomachine bladings; vortex induced oscillations; bridge buffeting. A project on specific applications is required.
MECH 6491 Engineering Metrology and Measurement Systems (4 credits)
Introduction to metrology, linear and geometric tolerancing, non-optical and optical methods in form measurement, fundamentals of optical metrology, interferometry - theory and overview, Moiré and phase shifting interfereometry, speckle interferometry and holography, light sources, detectors and imaging systems. Applications to precision measurement, Doppler vibrometry and dynamic characterization, applications to MEMS (Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems), and special topics include: nanometrology, X-ray interferometry and interference spectroscopy. A project is required.
MECH 6501 Advanced Materials (4 credits)
Advanced composites. Polymer matrix composites. Resins and fibers. Metal matrix composites. Ceramic matrix composites. Interfaces. Mechanical properties. Applications. A project on selected topics of current interest is required.
MECH 6511 Mechanical Forming of Metals (*) (4 credits)
Mechanisms of plastic deformation at ambient and elevated temperatures; plasticity theory; mechanical forming processes; forging; rolling; extrusion; wire drawing; deep drawing; bending; results of processing; mechanical properties; residual stresses; fibrous textures and preferred orientations; effects of annealing. Process modelling by shearline or finite element analysis. A project on current research topics and selected applications is required.
MECH 6521 Manufacturing of Composites (*) (4 credits)
Hand lay-up. Autoclave curing. Compression molding. Filament winding. Resin transfer molding. Braiding. Injection molding. Cutting. Joining. Thermoset and thermoplastic composites. Process modelling and computer simulation. Nondestructive evaluation techniques. A project on selected topics of current interest is required.
MECH 6531 Casting (4 credits)
Phase equilibrium diagrams; mechanisms of solidification; design of castings for various moulding processes, section sizes, dimensional accuracies and surface finishes; continuous casting; control of grain size; segregation and porosity. Defects in castings. A project on current research topic and selected applications is required.
MECH 6541 Joining Processes and Nondestructive Testing (4 credits)
Principles of joining; fusion welding; arc, torch, plasma, electron beam, resistance, etc; solid state welding; heterogeneous hot joining (brazing, soldering); heterogeneous cold joining; metallurgy of joints; joint properties; nondestructive testing processes; radiography, ultrasonic, magnetic particle, die penetrant, etc. A project on current research topic or selected applications is required.
MECH 6551 Fracture (4 credits)
Fracture mechanisms; ductile and cleavage; brittle fracture; notch effects; propagation of cracks; ductile-brittle transition; inter-granular fracture; hydrogen embrittlement; fatigue initiation mechanisms; crack propagation; preventive design; creep failure, mechanisms maps, fatigue; pore formation; grain boundary sliding; high temperature alloys, testing techniques; fractography. A project on current research topics and selected applications is required.
MECH 6561 High Strength Materials (4 credits)
Studies of the microstructures responsible for high strength and of the thermomechanical treatments producing these microstructures; dislocation theory; strain hardening; strengthening by solid-solution, massive hard phases, precipitation, dispersed particles, and martensitic and bainitic structures; fibre and particulate composites; surface treatments; residual stresses of thermal or mechanical origin. A project on current research topics and selected applications is required.
MECH 6571 Corrosion and Oxidation of Metals (4 credits)
Electrochemical corrosion and preventative measures. Stress corrosion, corrosion fatigue. Oxidation at low and high temperatures and protective measures. Selection of alloys and coatings. A project on current research topic or selected applications is required.
MECH 6581 Mechanical Behaviour of Polymer Composite Materials (*) (4 credits)
General applications of polymer composite materials in the aircraft, aerospace, automobile, marine, recreational and chemical processing industries. Different fibres and resins. Mechanics of a unidirectional lamina. Transformation of stress, strain, modulus and compliance. Off-axis engineering constants, shear and normal coupling coefficients. In-plane and flexural stiffness and compliance of different laminates including cross-ply, angle-ply, quasi-isotropic and general bidirectional laminates. Strength of laminates and failure criteria. Micro-mechanics. Projects on selected applications are required.
MECH 6601 Testing and Evaluation of Polymer Composite Materials and Structures (4 credits)
Theory and practice for the determination of tensile, compression and shear properties of composite materials; techniques for the determination of physical and chemical properties; non-destructive techniques such as ultrasonics, acousto-ultrasonics, acoustic emission, infrared and lasers for evaluation of composite structures. A project on selected topics of current interest is required.
MECH 6611 Numerically Controlled Machines (4 credits)
Prerequisite: MECH 6451 or equivalent.
Positioning and contouring NC machines, typical NC applications; analysis of typical NC systems and design considerations; components. A design project on multi-surface machine parts is required.
MECH 6621 Microprocessors and Applications (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: A course in industrial electronics or permission of the instructor.
Introduction to the concepts and practices of using microprocessors and micro-computers in such applications as instrumentation, manufacturing, control and automation; architecture and programming techniques; interface logic circuits; I/O systems; case studies of mechanical engineering applications. A project on specific topic or applications is required.
MECH 6631 Industrial Automation (4 credits)
Introduction to mechanization of industrial processes such as machining, material handling, assembling, and quality control; selection of actuators and sensors for mechanization; design of sequential control circuits using classical methods, ladder diagram, travel-step diagram and cascade method; specifying control sequences using GRAFCET and FUP; special purpose circuits such as emergency circuits, timers, and programmable logic controllers (PLCs); case studies dealing with typical industrial manufacturing processes and computer simulation. A project on specific topic or applications is required.
MECH 6641 Engineering Fracture Mechanics and Fatigue (4 credits)
Fracture mechanics and fatigue of machine elements and structures; Linear Elastic Fracture Mechanics (LEFM); Elastic Plastic Fracture Mechanics (EPFM); Finite Element Analysis for fracture; LEFM and EPFM Testing; Fracture mechanics approach to fatigue crack growth problem; Constant-amplitude, variable-amplitude and stochastic loading cases; Industrial applications to mechanical design and fracture and fatigue control in machine elements and structures; Damage tolerance design. A case study or project on selected applications is required.
MECH 6651 Structural Composites (4 credits)
Analysis for design of beams, columns, rods, plates, sandwich panels and shells made of composites; anisotropic elasticity; energy methods; vibration and buckling; local buckling in sandwich structures; free edge effects and delamination; joining; and failure considerations in design. A project on selected applications is required.
MECH 6661 Thermodynamics and Phase Equilibria of Materials (4 credits)
Thermodynamic laws and relationships. Partial and relative state functions: Activities in multicomponent systems, reference and standard states, solution thermodynamics. Thermodynamics of phase transformations and chemical reactions in engineering materials. Calculation of thermodynamic functions and properties. Experimental methods of determining thermodynamic properties. Multicomponent and multiphasic systems. Generalized phase rules, phase diagrams, stability diagrams and other diagram types. Computational thermodynamics for developing engineering materials. A project is required.
MECH 6671 Finite Element Method in Machine Design (4 credits)
Prerequisite: MECH 6441.
Role of Finite element method in machine design. Variational principles. Formulation of the finite element problem in stress, vibration and buckling analyses of machine components. Different elements and interpolation functions. Application in machine design; fracture. A case study or project on selected applications is required.
MECH 6681 Dynamics and Control of Nonholonomic Systems (4 credits)
Kinematics of nonholonomic systems; dynamics of nonholonomic systems, including d’Álembert principle, Euler-Lagrange equations; equations of motion of nonholonomic systems with Lagrangian multipliers; the reaction of ideal nonholonomic constraints; nonholonomic Caplygin systems; Bifurcation and stability analysis of the nonholonomic systems. Analysis and design of nonlinear control of nonholonomic systems, including kinematic control and dynamic control as well as force control. Controller designs with uncertain nonholonomic systems. Application examples including control of wheeled mobile robots and walking robots. A project is required.
MECH 6691 Optical Microsystems (4 credits)
Microfabrication and micromachining required for optical microsystems; optical microsystem modelling, simulation, sensitivity analysis. Properties of materials suitable for optical MEMS (Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems). Measurements, sensing and actuation suitable for optical microsystems. Introduction to micro-optical components; optical waveguide-based systems. Design of different optical MEMS devices. Chemical and biochemical sensing with optical microsystems. Assembly, packaging and testing of optical MEMS devices. A project is required.
MECH 6741 Mechatronics (*) (4 credits)
Introduction to mechatronics; basic elements of mechatronic systems. Measurement systems: including principles of measurement systems; sensors and transducers; signal conditioning processes and circuits; filters and data acquisition. Actuation systems: mechanical actuation systems and electrical actuation systems. Controllers: control modes; PID controller; performance measures; introduction to digital controllers and robust control. Modelling and analysis of mechatronic systems; performance measures; frequency response; transient response analysis; stability analysis. A project is required.
MECH 6751 Vehicle Dynamics (*) (4 credits)
Tire-terrain interactions; side-slip; cornering and aligning properties of tires: camber angle and camber torque; estimation of braking-tractive and cornering forces of tires; steady-state handling of road vehicles: steering response and directional stability; handling and directional response of vehicles with multiple steerable axles: handling of articulated vehicles: handling and directional response of tracked and wheeled off-road vehicles; directional response to simultaneous braking and steering. A project on research topics is required.
MECH 6761 Vehicular Internal Combustion Engines (*) (4 credits)
Mechanical design of vehicular engines; gas exchange and combustion engine processes; combustion chambers design; fuels and fuel supply; ignition and control systems; cooling and lubrication of engines; emissions formation and control; engine operational characteristics - matching with vehicles; enhancement of engine performance; engine testing; environmental impact of vehicular engines; recent developments in energy-efficient and “clean” engines. Design of calculation project of vehicular engine. Project work on alternative fuel delivering systems and emissions control for combusion engines. Modelling and simulation. Demonstration of alternative fuel injection system on diesel engine in lab.
MECH 6771 Driverless Ground Vehicles (*) (4 credits)
Definition and classifications; case studies of major industrial and research vehicle prototypes; applications; kinematic modelling for feedback control of a driverless vehicle as a planar rigid body; vehicle motion and its relation to steering and drive rates of its wheels; co-ordinate systems assignment; transformation matrices; condition for rolling without skidding and sliding; sensor models and sensor integrations; dead-reckoning control; global and local path planning; introduction to dynamic modelling of driverless vehicle with and without the dynamics of wheel assemblies; design of optimal controllers; introduction to adaptive neuro-morphic controller. Projects are an integral part of the course for which the following may be used: TUTSIM, FORTRAM, or C. A project on selected topics is required.
MECH 6781 Guided Vehicle Systems (*) (4 credits)
Definition and classification of guided transportation systems; track characterization: alignment, gage, profile and cross-level irregularities; wheel-rail interactions: rolling contact theories, creep forces; modelling of guided vehicle components; wheelset, suspension, truck and car body configurations, suspension characteristics; performance evaluation: stability/hunting, ride quality; introduction to advanced guided vehicles. A project on selected topics is an integral part of the course.
MECH 6791 Aircraft Hydro-Mechanical and Fuel Systems (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6201.
This course focuses on design principles and sizing of the following aircraft systems: hydraulic system, primary and secondary flight control actuation systems, landing gear systems, and fuel system. Traditional and new technology implementations in aircraft, helicopters and other aerospace vehicles are considered. Associated standards and regulations are described. Principles of architecture development and integration, as well as engineering tools for system sizing and simulation are covered. A project is required.
MECH 6891 Aircraft Pneumatic and Electrical Power Systems (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6201.
This course focuses on design principles and sizing of the following aircraft systems: electrical power system, auxiliary and emergency power systems, environmental control system, ice and rain protection system, and pneumatic power system. Traditional and new technology implementations in aircraft, helicopters and other aerospace vehicles are considered. Associated standards and regulations are described. Principles of architecture development and integration, as well as engineering tools for system sizing and simulation are covered. A project is required, including a laboratory component.
MECH 691 Topics in Mechanical Engineering I (4 credits)
See Note in Topic Area E02
MECH 6941 Concurrent Engineering in Aerospace Systems (4 credits)
Introduction: objectives, definitions, impact on product development; process modelling and optimization; forming of engineering team; selection of techniques, methodology and tools; market design focus vs. quality design focus; development time management; process integration; aerospace case studies/projects, future trends.
MECH 6961 Aerospace Case Study I
See Mechanical & Industrial Engineering section.
MECH 6971 Aerospace Case Study II
See Mechanical & Industrial Engineering section.
Note: MECH 6961 and MECH 6971 are restricted to students registered in aerospace engineering programs at Concordia or participating universities. These courses cover topical case studies drawn from aerospace industrial experience. They are conducted in a modular form by experienced engineers who specialize in one or more facets of this industry. They are given in collaboration with the other participating universities and may be conducted at any of the Montreal universities in the language of convenience to the instructor.
MECH 7011 Dynamics of Hydraulic Control Systems (4 credits)
Prerequisites: MECH 6021, 6061.
Review of hydraulic control system technology and the need for dynamic analyses. Conventional techniques for assuring good response by analysis. Power flow modelling, power bond graphs, and digital simulation techniques. Obtaining dynamic relationships and coefficients. Phenomena which can affect dynamic response. Projects on selected topics are required.
MECH 7101 Convection Heat Transfer (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6201.
Heat transfer in laminar flow, review of the differential and integral forms of the general energy equation for boundary layer regimes; solution of the energy equation for free convection, forced convection and heat transfer in entrance regions. Heat transfer in turbulent flow; review of the energy equation for turbulent flow; momentum-heat transfer analogies; experimental results for forced convection, free convection, and combined free and forced convection. Project or term paper required.
MECH 7501 Design Using Composite Materials (4 credits)
Prerequisite: MECH 6581.
General concept involving design using composite materials. Integral approach to design. Selection of materials. Selection of fabrication techniques. Computer-aided design tools. Consideration for fracture, fatigue, buckling and impact. Joining consideration. Design of tubes, beams, columns. Design of aircraft components. A project on selected topics is required.
MECH 7511 Vehicle Vibration and Control (4 credits)
Dynamic modelling of ground vehicles for analysis of ride performance; ride comfort and safety criteria; modelling of human body; characterization of road inputs; modelling and design of vibration isolators: primary suspension, secondary suspension; active, semi-active and passive isolators; kinematic and dynamic analysis of suspension linkages; laboratory methods for performance evaluation of vehicle suspension systems; software packages and case studies. Projects on selected applications are required.
MECH 7711 Handling and Stability of Road Vehicles (4 credits)
Prerequisite: MECH 6751 or equivalent.
Mathematical methods in vehicle dynamics; tire and suspension modelling and design for handling; static roll; steady turning and off-tracking analysis of straight and articulated road vehicles; directional stability and braking analysis; directional response of articulated vehicles with steerable axles; software packages and case studies. Project on selected topics is an integral part of the course.
MECH 791 Topics in Mechanical Engineering II (4 credits)
See Note in Topic Area E02
MECH 8011 Doctoral Seminar in Mechanical Engineering (***)
Grading on a pass/fail basis only. No credit value.
ENGR 8901 Master of Applied Science Research and Thesis (29 credits)
ENGR 8911 Doctoral Research and Thesis
INSE 8901 Master of Applied Science Research and Thesis (25 credits)
E63 - PROJECT, REPORT AND INDUSTRIAL TRAINING
ENCS 6931 Industrial Stage and Training
ELEC 6961 Graduate Seminar in Electrical and Computer Engineering
INSE 6961 Graduate Seminar in Information and Systems Engineering
ENGR 692 Case Study and Report
ENGR 6971 Project and Report I
ENGR 6981 Project and Report II
ENGR 6991 Project and Report III
INDU 6990 Industrial Engineering Capstone
INDU 6991 Engineering Management Industrial Stage I
INDU 6992 Engineering Management Industrial Stage II
E66 - SYSTEMS ENGINEERING
INSE 6311 Sustainable Infrastructure Planning and Management Systems
INSE 6400 Principles of Systems Engineering
INSE 6411 Product Design Theory and Methodology
INSE 6421 Systems Integration and Testing
INSE 6431 Ad Hoc Wireless Networks: Architectures and Protocols
E67 - 3D GRAPHICS AND INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
INSE 6510 Video Game Technology and Development
INSE 6530 3D Graphics and Computer Animation for Game Design
E68 - QUALITY SYSTEMS ENGINEERING
INSE 6210 Total Quality Methodologies in Engineering
INSE 6220 Advanced Statistical Approaches to Quality
INSE 6230 Total Quality Project Management
INSE 6240 Executive Communication
INSE 6250 Quality Methodologies for Software
INSE 6260 Software Quality Assurance
INSE 6270 Quality-Based Systems Engineering
INSE 6280 Quality Assurance for Systems Engineering
INSE 6290 Quality in Supply Chain Design
INSE 6300 Quality Assurance in Supply Chain Management
INSE 6310 Systems Engineering Maintenance Management
E69 - INFORMATION SYSTEMS SECURITY
INSE 6110 Foundations of Cryptography
INSE 6120 Crypto-Protocol and Network Security
INSE 6130 Operating Systems Security
INSE 6140 Malware Defenses and Application Security
INSE 6150 Security Evaluation Methodologies
INSE 6160 Database Security and Privacy
INSE 6170 Network Security Architecture and Management
INSE 6180 Security and Privacy Implications of Data Mining
INSE 6190 Wireless Network Security
INSE 6610 Cybercrime Investigations
INSE 6620 Cloud Computing Security and Privacy
INSE 6630 Recent Developments in Information Systems Security
INSE 6640 Smart Grids and Control System Security
INSE 6650 Trusted Computing
INSE 6660 Secure Programming
INSE 6670 Embedded Systems Security
INSE 6680 Systems Physical Security
E70 - INFORMATION SYSTEMS ENGINEERING
INSE 6100 Advanced Java Platforms
INSE 6320 Risk Analysis for Information and Systems Engineering
INSE 6441 Applied Game Theory and Mechanism Design
INSE 7100 Design and Analysis of Security Protocols
INSE 7110 Value Added Service Engineering in Next Generation Networks
INSE 7120 Advanced Network Management
E71 - COMPUTER SCIENCE
See courses listed for Topic Areas C01 to C07 in Computer Science and Software Engineering Section.
E72 - BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION PROGRAM
MBA 607 Financial Accounting for Managerial Decisions
MBA 608 Managerial Statistics
MBA 614 Financial Management
MBA 616 Operations Management
MBA 628 Management Accounting
E73 - SOFTWARE ENGINEERING
See courses listed for Topic Areas C08 to C13 in Computer Science and Software Engineering Section.
F03 - APPLICATION SPECIFIC INTEGRATED CIRCUITS
COEN 6501 Digital System Design and Synthesis
COEN 6511 VLSI Circuit Design
COEN 6521 Design for Testability
COEN 6531 ASIC Synthesis
COEN 6541 Functional Hardware Verification
COEN 6551 Formal Hardware Verification
ELEC 6051 Introduction to Analog VLSI
ELEC 6071 Mixed-Signal VLSI for Communication Systems (*)
ELEC 6081 Modern Analog Filter Design
(*) Cross-listed courses
(***) Available only to students admitted prior to September 1997.
(****) Students admitted prior to September 1997 are not allowed to substitute ENCS 8011 for an equivalent course work.
Course Descriptions
Building Engineering
BCEE 6961 Graduate Seminar in Building and Civil Engineering (1 credit)
MEng students must attend a set of seminars identified by the Department and submit a comprehensive report on selected topics. The report, including an abstract, must be suitably documented and illustrated, should be at least 1000 words in length, must be type-written on one side of 21.5 cm by 28 cm white paper of quality, and must be enclosed in binding. Students are referred to Form and Style: Thesis, Reports, Term Papers, fourth edition by Campbell and Ballou, published by Houghton Mifflin.
Note: This course cannot be taken by MASc or PhD students.
BLDG 6061 Structural Systems for Buildings (4 credits)
Building components and assembled systems. Structural efficiency and economy: rigid frames, shear walls, framed tube, latticed structures; membrane, air and cable supported structures. Selection and preliminary design of building structural systems, materials and components. Case studies.
BLDG 6071 Wind Engineering and Building Aerodynamics (4 credits)
Atmospheric circulations; atmospheric boundary layer; wind structure; wind speed and turbulence measurements; bluff body aerodynamics; mean and fluctuating wind forces on buildings; internal wind pressures; along-wind, across-wind and torsional building response to wind; snow drifting and accumulation problems; dispersion of gaseous pollutants. A case study or a project is required.
BLDG 6111 Computer-Aided Building Operation (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 6711.
Computer systems for energy management, including scheduling and operation of HVAC systems and lighting. Applications for intelligent buildings. Use of simulation and knowledge-based software for automatic regulation of building operation. Diagnosis of malfunctions and modifications of operations. Computerized building security systems. Actions during extraordinary conditions such as fire emergencies. A project is required.
BLDG 6151 Database Applications in Building and Civil Engineering (4 credits)
Components, properties and limits of databases and database management systems (DBMS). Database requirements for engineering tasks. Design of database schema and implementation in commercially available DBMS. Engineering data modelling techniques. Topics include: the entity/relationship model; the relational data model; the standard database language SQL; and the object-oriented data model. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken ENGR 6151 may not take this course for credit.
BLDG 6221 Design of Computer-Aided Systems in Building and Civil Engineering (4 credits)
Object-oriented modelling of physical components, design objectives, performance requirements and engineering processes. Identification of objects and definition of their arrangement and interaction to model engineering processes. Overview of the life-cycle of an engineering software project. Project on implementation of a small scale computer-aided engineering system.
Note: Students who have taken ENGR 6221 may not take this course for credit.
BLDG 6231 Applications of Artificial Intelligence in Building and Civil Engineering (4 credits)
Introduction to artificial intelligence techniques in an engineering context; heuristic search methods, logical reasoning, knowledge-based systems, neural networks, genetics algorithms, and case-based reasoning. Algorithmic versus knowledge-based programming for engineering applications. Emphasis on knowledge-based systems and their characteristics, capabilities and limitations. Case studies in design, failure diagnosis and processing of standards. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken ENGR 6231 may not take this course for credit.
BLDG 6241 Building Information Modelling in Construction (4 credits)
Topics include introduction to Building Information Modelling (BIM) technologies; BIM implementation at different project stages - pre-construction, construction, and facility management; BIM-Aided design alternatives, constructability analysis, and development of space-time-cost models; BIM visualization for trade coordination and processes monitoring. A project is required.
BLDG 6541 Heat Transfer (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the Bachelor of/Baccalaureate in Engineering (Building) Program).
Steady state heat conduction. Convection and radiation heat exchange. Refrigeration cycles. Theory of air vapour mixtures. Introduction to heat transfer in building environment. Unsteady state of heat transfer. Case studies.
BLDG 6561 Building Economics I (*) (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the Bachelor of/Baccalaureate in Engineering (Building) Program).
Development of economic performance measures of interest to developers, owners, contractors and users. Sources of finance and the determinants of the cost of money. Elementary estimating; cost indices; forecasting techniques; value of money; economic comparison techniques; evaluation of projects in private and public sectors; tax regulations; inflation; life-cycle costing; risk analysis; non-economic attributes. Case studies of economic analysis of projects, single building and building components. A project is required.
BLDG 6571 Project Management (4 credits)
Introduction to managing the development, design and construction of buildings. Examination of project management for the total development process, including inter-relationships between owners, developers, financing sources, designers, contractors and users; methods of project delivery; introduction to planning and scheduling; role and tasks of the project manager; feasibility analyses; construction claims; financing and cash-flow analysis; government regulations; environmental and social constraints; introduction to control of cost, time and technical performance; human factors; computer applications. A project is required.
BLDG 6581 Decision Analysis (4 credits)
Development of a basic theory of decision making under uncertainty. Rationales of decision makers, utility, the concept of the value of perfect information. The Bayesian approach to decision making; pre-posterior analysis and optimal fixed-sized analysis for random processes. Decision analysis with multiple objective, structuring the problem, multi-attributed utility functions, case studies. A project is required.
BLDG 6591 Computer-Aided Building Design (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisites: BLDG 6561.
Identification of objectives, decision variables, processes and information flow in building design. Application and evaluation of computer systems to components of the building design process. Determination of decision variables in problem modelling and sensitivity of results. Current applications in structural analysis and design, space layout, electrical distribution systems, HVAC design, lighting design, estimating, specification editing and scheduling. Evaluation of issues of interdisciplinary information control and interchange. A project is required.
BLDG 6601 Building Enclosure (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent).
Prerequisite: BLDG 6611.
Schematic and detail design of walls, windows and roofs. Complex building types will be examined to show the relationships between massing, materials, energy conservation and building use. Solar shading, daylighting, rainscreen and air barrier principles will be emphasized. A project is required.
BLDG 6611 Building Science (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the Bachelor of/Baccalaureate in Engineering (Building) Program).
Environmental exterior and interior influences on inner environmental control. Topics include: thermal energy exchanges, psychrometrics, vapour and fluid flow, air leakage, ventilation and design comfort conditions, selection of materials and building systems. A case study or a project is required.
BLDG 6621 Modern Building Materials (*) (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent).
Prerequisite: BLDG 6611 previously or concurrently.
Structural, thermal and acoustical properties of new building materials such as: plastics, synthetic fibres, adhesives, sealants, caulking compounds, forams, sandwich panels, composites, polymer-concrete systems, fibre-reinforced concretes, plastic mortars, polymers for flooring, roofing, synthetic wall papers. Consideration of corrosion, bio- and thermal degradation, stability under ultraviolet and solar radiation. A project is required.
BLDG 6631 Fundamentals of Facility Management (4 credits)
Systems approach to planning, organization and implementation of a facility, including space allocation, leasing and marketing, operation, maintenance, and renovation over the life of the building. Forecast of budget requirements for effective operation, maintenance, and renovation. Correlation between the operation of the building and health risks, comfort, productivity, and costs. Integrated approach to the planning, analysis, evaluation, organization and optimization of physical systems of facilities. Case studies.
BLDG 6641 Industrialized Building (4 credits)
Trends toward off-site fabrication of buildings. Needs and technical requirements of international markets. Principal types of industrialized systems, materials and components. Optimization of industrialized production. Planning, design, construction and maintenance. Codes and standards. A case study and project.
BLDG 6651 Fire and Smoke Control in Buildings (*) (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent).
Prerequisite: BLDG 6611.
Topics treated include: fire and smoke control; failure mechanisms of building enclosure, illustrated by case studies; performance codes for enclosure systems; enclosure design for extreme operation environments. A project is required.
BLDG 6661 Hydrothermal Performance of the Building Envelope (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 6611 previously or concurrently.
Modelling of dynamic building envelope thermal performance. Thermal bridges. Modelling of transient moisture transfer, condensation and accumulation. Advanced glazings and evaluation of window performance. Active building envelope components for heat and moisture control. Experimental techniques for performance evaluation of the building envelope; infrared thermography, guarded hot box and calibrated hot box tests. A project is required.
BLDG 6671 Diagnostics and Rehabilitation of Building Envelope (4 credits)
Failures in building envelopes. Modes of deterioration including freeze-thaw, chemical, movements. Diagnostics and investigation techniques including field survey instruments. Assessment of intervention magnitude and performance of proposed solutions. Codes, standards and regulations. Case studies.
BLDG 6701 Building Environment (4 credits)
Design criteria of indoor environment. Assessment of thermal comfort and sensation. Mathematical models of thermal comfort: predictive models and adaptive models. Prediction of thermal sensation using: computer simulation, and measurements with thermal comfort meter. Verification of compliance with standards. Visual comfort. Standards for quality of visual environment. Calculation of photometric parameters. Preliminary design of the indoor lighting system. Evaluation of illuminance level using commercially available software packages. Acoustical comfort. Standards for quality of acoustical environment. Sound control measures through the design of buildings and HVAC systems. Two projects.
BLDG 6711 Mechanical Systems in Building (4 credits)
Co-requisite: BLDG 6701.
HVAC Systems. Analysis, selection and operation; design of air and water distribution systems in buildings; waste water disposal and sprinkler systems. A project is required.
BLDG 6721 Building Acoustics (*) (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent).
An understanding of sound and an examination of the major factors which contribute to a controlled acoustic environment in buildings. Topics covered include: basic vibration, sources, measurement and description of environmental noise, psychological and physiological aspects of sound perception; sound transmission through building elements; reverberation, measurement and control; and room acoustics. Case studies and a project are required.
BLDG 6731 Building Illumination (*) (4 credits)
Quantitative and qualitative aspects of illumination systems. Photometric quantities, visual perception and colour theory, standards, daylight and artificial illumination systems, radiative transfer. Fixture and lamp characteristics, control devices for improved energy efficiency. Design of advanced fenestration systems for daylighting. Field measurements and artificial sky tests. Virtual reality and other computer simulation techniques for lighting. A project is required.
BLDG 6741 HVAC Control Systems (4 credits)
HVAC control loops: classification and structure, specifications, hardware, tuning and testing. Optimization of single- and multi-loop control systems. Energy management systems for monitoring, control and diagnostics of HVAC system operation. A project is required.
BLDG 6751 Indoor Air Quality and Ventilation (*) (4 credits)
History and development of indoor air science. Relevant national and provincial standards and regulations. Principles of occupational hygiene; identification, evaluation and control of physical, biological, and chemical agents in indoor environment. Ventilation requirements. Definition of ventilation efficiency and removal effectiveness; measurement techniques and modelling. Indoor air monitoring; field studies of gases, fumes, solvents, and dusts. Plan for building walkthrough evaluations; strategies for improving indoor air quality. Building design for acceptable indoor air quality, material selection and specification. A case study or project.
BLDG 6761 Intelligent Buildings (4 credits)
Issues related to the Intelligent Building; automation, communication and security. Mechanical, electrical, electronic subsystems and their integration within the building; configuration and operational characteristics; performance specifications; analytical models; design methods; case studies. A project is required.
BLDG 6781 Energy Management in Buildings (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 6611 previously or concurrently.
Energy-related standards, codes and by-laws. Methods of assessment of the actual energy performance. Conventional and innovative measurement and analysis techniques. Energy-oriented renovation or replacement of building sub-systems (e.g. HVAC and lighting systems). Prediction of energy and cost savings using commercially available software packages. Verification of compliance with standards. Life cycle analysis. A case study and project.
BLDG 6791 Thermal Building Simulation (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 6611.
Mathematical models of heat and mass transfer phenomena through building components: transfer function methods and numerical methods. Models of radiative and convective heat transfer phenomena within buildings. Application to equipment-based modelling of HVAC systems: first principle models and correlation-based models. System-based modelling of HVAC systems. Validation of computer models. A project is required.
BLDG 6801 Construction Planning and Control (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 6571.
Methods of delivering construction. Contractual relationships and organizational structures. Phases of project development. Estimating resource requirements; costs and durations. Bidding strategies. Network analysis using CPM and PERT, time-cost trade-off, resource allocation. Cash flow analysis. Earned-value concept for integrated time and cost control. Quality control. Value engineering. A case study and project.
Note: Students who have taken the undergraduate equivalent BCEE 465 may not take this course for credit.
BLDG 6811 Labour and Industrial Relations in Construction (*) (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent).
The study of labour legislation with special emphasis on the construction industry, union organization, the theory and practice of negotiations, mediation, contract administration and arbitration. Review of actual contracts, discussion of future trends. Case studies.
BLDG 6821 Legal Issues in Construction (*) (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent).
Legal concepts and processes applicable to the development of constructed facilities and to the operation of the construction firm. Emphasis on Quebec law and institutions. Case studies.
BLDG 6831 Construction Processes (*) (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent).
A study of current construction methods and techniques. The subjects include wood framing, masonry, concrete forming, slipforming, precast construction, industrialized building, deep excavation shoring and underpinning. The methods are described in terms of materials involved, equipment required, current field practice and safety considerations. Case studies.
BLDG 6851 Project Cost Estimating (*) (4 credits)
Techniques and procedures used for estimating cost of construction projects. Topics include: cost estimation process; elements of project cost; conceptual and detailed cost estimation methods; risk assessment and range estimating; case studies; computer-aided estimating. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken the undergraduate equivalent BCEE 464 may not take this course for credit.
BLDG 6861 Simulations and Design of Construction Operations (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 6831.
Principles of modelling and simulation. Classification and validation of simulation models. Analysis of input data and outputs. Object Oriented Simulation (OOS). Simulation languages. Application of discrete event simulation in construction operations including earthmoving operations, building construction operations, and tunneling operations. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken the undergraduate equivalent BCEE 466 may not take this course for credit.
BLDG 691 Topics in Building Engineering I (4 credits)
Note: Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for these courses, providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. CIVI 691A, CIVI 691B, etc.
BLDG 6921 Trenchless Technology for Rehabilitation Works (4 credits)
State of Canadian urban infrastructure with a focus on underground facilities; current industry practice; common types of defects in underground pipes; diagnostics of defects and evaluation techniques for the conditions of water and sewer mains; planning, equipment, materials and methods for rehabilitation of water and sewer mains; case studies.
Note: Students who have taken ENGR 6721 may not take this course for credit.
BLDG 6931 Infrastructure Rehabilitation (4 credits)
State of Canadian urban infrastructure. Rehabilitation techniques as applicable to steel and concrete structures; degradation mechanisms; detection and classification of defects. Evaluation and assessment of the conditions of buildings and bridges. Rehabilitation materials and methods. Codes and guidelines. Case studies.
Note: Students who have taken ENGR 6731 may not take this course for credit.
BLDG 6951 Solar Building Modelling and Design (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 6611 or permission of instructor.
Design principles of solar buildings, including direct gain, indirect gain and solaria. Net-zero energy solar buildings; analytical and numerical models. Performance of glazing systems, transparent insulation, and airflow windows. Building-integrated photovoltaic systems. Thermal storage sizing for solar energy storage; phase-change thermal storage. Thermosyphon collectors. Prevention of overheating, shading systems and natural ventilation. A project is required.
BLDG 7401 Dispersion of Building Exhaust (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 6611.
Atmospheric parameters, wind velocity profiles, meteorological data. Gaussian dispersion equations. Plume rise and trajectories. Evaluation of stack gas plume dispersion. Trapped plumes; Turner’s approximation. Potential reingestion of building exhaust. Analytical, numerical and experimental modelling of dispersion process; design guidelines fumigation. A case study or a project is required.
BLDG 7511 Integrated Building Design (4 credits)
Prerequisites: BLDG 6601 and BLDG 6711.
Compatibility among building subsystems (structural, envelope, mechanical, lighting, materials) and between the building and the environment. Integration issues in the design, production and operation of the built facility. Case studies of failures caused by lack of compatibility. Consideration for tolerances and sustainable development. A project is required.
BLDG 7521 Advanced Computer-Aided Building Design (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 6231.
Characteristics of the building design process. Traditional versus emerging roles of computers pertaining to building design activities. Preliminary design and integrated design issues: analysis with incomplete/imprecise data, automatic sizing and checking based on Standards, interfaces between CAD and analysis routines, communications across disciplines and through design stages, standardization. Applications involving operations research techniques, KBS and analysis packages for engineering performance evaluation. A project is required.
BLDG 7601 Durability of Building Materials (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 6611 or equivalent.
Concepts underlying long-term performance of building materials such as: ceramics, stucco and synthetic stucco, lightweight concrete, wood and wood-based products, thermal insulation, selected composite materials, sealants, membranes used for waterproofing and air barriers. Methods of fabrication, properties and evaluation for durability. Failure mechanisms under combined actions of mechanical and environmental loads (temperature, moisture, freeze-thaw, solar radiation, salt solutions, air pollution, and microorganisms). A case study and project.
BLDG 7811 Project Acquisition and Control (4 credits)
Prerequisites: BLDG 6571, 6801.
Study of techniques and procedures used for construction project procurement and control. Topics treated include: marketing, bidding strategies, work break-down structure and contract packages, techniques for integrated time and cost control; management information systems for control, procurement; productivity measurement, contingency and escalation analysis and control. A project is required.
BLDG 7831 Building Economics II (4 credits)
Prerequisites: BLDG 6561, 6581.
Topics include: replacement analysis; risk analysis of projects; sensitivity analysis; forecasting techniques, profitability analysis; multi-attributed decision analysis, case studies. A project is required.
BLDG 7841 Information Technology Applications in Construction (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 7811.
Use of computers in estimating, cost engineering, scheduling and resource analyses, materials control, report generation and operations simulation. Information systems: information-based theories of management; information technology, cost and value information; analysis, design and implementation of a network based control system. Considerations for computer usage in construction firms; hardware, software, operations, economic, human and organizational. Product and process modelling; Internet use in product delivery. A project is required.
BLDG 7861 Business Practices in Construction (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 6801.
A study of business practices as they relate to the construction industry. Topics treated include: organization; marketing; bid preparation; bonding; personnel management; financing; accounting; cash-flow analysis; capital budgeting. The principles are first presented and then followed by case studies. A project is required.
BLDG 7871 Construction Equipment Management (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 6561.
The study of various classes of equipment, (cranes, excavators, loaders, tractors, etc.) used in construction. Methods are developed for selecting, acquiring, maintaining and replacing equipment. Treatment of simulation and its use for the optimal selection of equipment spreads. A project is required.
BLDG 791 Topics in Building Engineering II (4 credits)
Note: Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for these courses, providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. CIVI 691A, CIVI 691B, etc.
BLDG 8011 Doctoral Seminar in Building Engineering (***)
Grading on a pass/fail basis only. No credit value.
Civil Engineering
CIVI 6001 Advanced Reinforced Concrete (4 credits)
Strength limits; modes of failure; flexural and inclined cracking strength; crack propagation; crack width; deformation; biaxial and multiaxial strength of concrete; ultimate strength in flexure; ultimate strength in diagonal splitting; ultimate strength of columns; current research progress and modelling for finite element analysis; new code regulations. A project is required.
CIVI 6011 Pre-cast and Pre-stressed Concrete Structures (4 credits)
Prefabrication and prestressing concepts; segmental and modular structures and connections; composite and pre-and post-tensioned structures; analysis and design of determinate and indeterminate systems; design codes. A project is required.
CIVI 6021 Durability of Concrete Materials (4 credits)
Influence of constituent materials (cements, aggregates and admixtures) on the properties of fresh and hardened concrete. Chemistry and hydration reactions of cement and alternate cementing materials. Development of pore structure and its influence on transport and deterioration mechanisms, durability testing. Concrete mixture design and optimization for high performance and other speciality concrete types. Climatic loads affecting durability and performance. Performance vs. prescriptive specifications. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken ENGR 691B (Performance and Durability of Concrete Materials) may not take this course for credit.
CIVI 6031 Seismic Assessment and Retrofit of Structures (4 credits)
Seismic rehabilitation requirements and performance objectives. Evolution of codes, standards and regulations. Selection of retrofit design methodology. General strategies to develop rehabilitation schemes: add stiffness, damping, and/or mass reduction. Seismic assessment of existing steel structures. Behaviour and design of structures equipped with energy dissipation devices. Case studies and a project are required.
Note: Students who have taken CIVI 691B (Seismic Assessment and Retrofit of Structures) may not take this course for credit.
CIVI 6051 Design of Industrial Structures (4 credits)
Problems in the design of industrial structures in steel, reinforced concrete, masonry, and timber; rejuvenation and expansion of existing plant facilities; design of bracing systems, foundations, silos and liquid storage tanks; connections, standard details and codes. A case study and project.
CIVI 6061 Structural Health Monitoring (4 Credits)
Review of the current state of infrastructure including bridges, dams, pipelines as well as buildings. Components of civil infrastructure including smart and innovative structures. Structural Health Monitoring (SHM): principles, techniques, implementation, interdisciplinary approach, advantages and challenges. SHM systems: component and system design, sensors and instrumentation, data acquisition, data management, interpretation of SHM data, assessment of structural condition, and decision making. Damage detection methods: local and global, analytical and experimental, non-destructive evaluation, vibration based damage identification. Field applications. A project is required.
CIVI 6071 Advanced Steel Structures Design (4 credits)
Topics of this course include design principles of ductile building structures; fundamentals of stability theory, frame stability; concept, methods and applications of plastic analysis; design for local and global stability of braced frames, moment-resisting frames and structures equipped with passive supplemental damping systems: hysteretic, yielding and self-centring dampers; design strategies for enhanced seismic stability; computer applications. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for CIVI 691C (Advanced Steel Structures Design) may not take this course for credit.
CIVI 6101 Planning and Design of Bridges (4 credits)
History and development of bridges; basic parameters; material, system and geometry; selection of location and optimum proportioning of different structural types; selection and design of steel and concrete highway and railway bridge structures based on requirements of economics; maintenance, aesthetics and safety; modern trends in bridge design and construction; analysis of existing bridges; numerical examples. A project is required.
CIVI 6301 Hydrology (*) (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent).
Weather elements; precipitation, stage-discharge relations; evapo-transpiration; ground water flow, method of images; streamflow hydrograph, unit hydrograph and its applications, synthetic hydrographs; laminar flow; hydrologic routing; instantaneous hydrography; hydraulic routing, method of characteristics, kinematic routing; statistical analysis, confidence intervals, stochastic generator, auto-regressive model; applications of hydrology. A case study and a project are required.
CIVI 6331 Hydraulic Engineering (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent).
Development of surface water resources; basic measurements in hydraulic engineering; storage reservoirs; practical problems; run-off characteristics of natural streams; control structures; economic analysis; energy dissipators; sediment transportation; transitions; elements of river engineering; navigation; control of floods. A case study and a project are required.
CIVI 6381 Hydraulic Structures (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent).
Design of storage dams; characteristics of spillways and other outlet works; design of control structures; principles and design of flow measuring structures; special topics. A project is required.
CIVI 6401 Transportation Systems Analysis (4 credits)
Aspects of probability and statistics as applied to transportation; network theory; system operations and safety management; applications of optimization and decision theory to selection of alternative systems and facility location; evaluation of traffic control devices; signal timing plans and management strategies. A project is required.
CIVI 6411 Urban Transportation Planning (*) (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent).
Forecasting future travel patterns; travel characteristics; systems approach to transportation planning process; land use data collection and demand analysis; trip generation; trip distribution; model and root assignment; transportation of commodities; environmental impact analysis. Computer modelling. A project is required.
CIVI 6441 Traffic Engineering (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent).
Analysis of existing traffic flow conditions; study of traffic characteristics; volume and speed surveys; capacity-performance relations for urban streets and intersections; signal timing and coordination; traffic and environmental management; computer applications in incident detection and control; analysis and management of safety. A project is required.
CIVI 6451 Pavement Design (4 credits)
Components of pavement systems; materials, tests and specifications; granular and treated bases, subgrade and drainage; earthwork and soil stabilization; mechanistic-empirical theory for pavements; damage accumulation; axle loads and stresses in pavements; design methods for flexible and rigid pavements of highways and airports; design of pavement overlays; economic requirements; design projects and computer applications. A project is required.
CIVI 6461 Pavement Management Systems (4 credits)
Topics include introduction to pavement systems; strategic, tactical and operational planning for sustainable pavements; preservation, rehabilitation, upgrading and expansion; pavement damage assessment; data collection; decision making; performance modelling; pavement deterioration; coordination and scheduling of interventions. A project is required.
CIVI 6481 Sustainable Management of Industrial Waste (4 credits)
Industrial ecology and sustainable engineering concepts, characterization and sources of industrial waste, toxicological and risk aspects of waste management; environmental impact, material flow analysis, energy balance and recovery, management of water and resources use, material minimization, storage, physical, chemical and biological transformations, recycling, reuse and disposal, life cycle assessment, regulations, ISO certification. A project is required.
CIVI 6491 Engineering Aspects of Site Remediation (4 credits)
Physico-chemical characteristics of subsurface; soil biology; introduction to subsurface transport of contaminants; site assessment techniques; bioremediation principles and techniques; physico-chemical remediation; thermal removal; in-situ and ex-situ groundwater techniques; natural attenuation; case studies; lab demonstrations. A project is required.
CIVI 6501 Foundation Engineering (4 credits)
Theoretical development of bearing capacity of shallow and deep foundations, settlement analyses, design of retaining walls, sheet piles, tiebacks and caissons, dynamic analyses of pile foundations, design of machine foundations, foundations on difficult soils, construction and performance of foundations, computer applications, case histories. A project is required.
CIVI 6511 Earth Structures and Slope Stability (4 credits)
Design and construction of earth and rockfill dams. Seepage problems, flow nets, seepage control, soil compaction and stabilization. Computer analysis of slope stability, factor of safety. Measures taken to limit and accommodate settlements. Case studies.
CIVI 6521 Soil Behaviour (4 credits)
Drained and undrained shear strength of soils, stress-strain relationships, two and three dimensional stress paths. Pore water pressure coefficients in saturated and partially saturated clays. One and three dimensional consolidation theories, design of sand drains, and applications. Special geotechnical problems. A project is required.
CIVI 6531 Soil Testing and Properties (4 credits)
Measurement and evaluation of soil consolidation, strength, and pore water pressure characteristics by means of consolidation, triaxial and direct shear tests. Application of test results to design and research problems. A project is required.
CIVI 6541 Reinforced Earth (4 credits)
Design of geotechnical structures reinforced with geotextiles and geogrids to improve their strength and deformation properties. Use of geonets and geomembranes to accelerate the drainage and consolidation of soil systems. Soil nailing and inclined piling to prevent downhill creep and slope failure. Analysis and design of stone columns used to support light structures and prevent instability due to soil liquefaction. A project is required.
CIVI 6601 Modelling in Building and Environmental Engineering (4 credits)
Continuous and discrete forms of conservation laws: mass, momentum and energy, numerical methods (finite differences, implicit and explicit schemes, finite elements). Transport of contaminants and moisture in buildings and contaminants in the environment. Modelling and measuring sources and sinks of pollutants. Computer applications to building and environmental engineering. A case study and project.
CIVI 6611 Environmental Engineering (4 credits)
Introduction to waste water treatment and control; stream pollution and control; ground water pollution; air pollution; acid rain, meteorological aspects. Noise pollution; hazardous waste disposal; solid waste management. A case study and a project are required.
CIVI 6621 Engineering Aspects of Biological Treatment of Water and Air (4 credits)
Introduction to aerobic/anaerobic microbial processes, design of aerobic and anaerobic systems for biological treatment of municipal, industrial and agricultural water and air pollution, design and modelling of activated sludge reactors, trickling filters, plug flow reactors, lagoons, nutrient removal, constructed wetlands, phytoremediation, biofilters, bioscrubbers, management of biosolids, lab demonstration. A case study and project.
CIVI 6631 Hazardous Material Management and Transportation (4 credits)
Characterization and sources of hazardous materials, accidental release of hazardous material, toxicological aspects of hazardous material; risk analysis, legal issues, management of hazardous material after catastrophic events, storage, treatments, recycling, reuse and exchange of hazardous materials, life cycle analysis, attenuation of accidental release of hazardous materials, transportation and environmental systems interface, transportation network, minimum-risk route models, determination of safe truck routes and management. A project is required.
CIVI 6641 Unit Operations in Environmental Engineering (4 credits)
Physical and chemical principles underlying coagulation, flocculation, sedimentation, sorption, reverse osmosis, electrodialysis, ion exchange and sludge dewatering. Design and scale-up equations for clarifiers, absorption columns, filters, centrifuges, electrodialysis stacks, air components and demineralization units, lab demonstration. A case study and a project are required.
CIVI 6651 Water Pollution and Control (4 credits)
Physical, chemical and biological characteristics of water, water quality standards, reaction kinetics and material balances, eutrophication. Containment of reactive contaminants. Natural purification processes in water system, adsorption, absorption; diffusion and dispersion, oxidation. Large-scale transport of contaminants, single and multiple source models; modelling of transport processes, computer simulation, introduction to groundwater pollution, sea-water intrusion. A case study and a project are required.
CIVI 6661 Environmental Impact Assessment (*) (4 credits)
Engineering activities and the environment; environmental ethics. Prediction and estimation, statistical analysis of impact on air, water, soil quality and biological, socio-economic, cultural environments. Water and air pollution law, solid and hazardous waste laws. Applications of GIS, Environmental inventories, assessment preparation and review. Federal and provincial laws and regulations on environmental assessment. Strategies for environmental compliance, resolution of environmental conflicts. Case studies and project.
CIVI 6671 Fate and Transport of Contaminants in the Environment (4 credits)
Physical and chemical properties of organic and inorganic contaminants, air-soil-water-cycle and contaminant interactions, adsorption/desorption models, soil components in contaminant transport, influence of groundwater composition, advective flow, diffusion transport, diffusion and dispersion coefficients, partition coefficients, mechanisms and modelling of contaminant transport in soil and groundwater, environmental fate of contaminants Case studies concerning landfills, greenhouse effects, soil and groundwater interactions, nuclear waste disposal. A project is required.
CIVI 6681 Environmental Nanotechnology (4 credits)
Topics include basic concepts of nanoscience and nanotechnology; characterization of nanomaterials; nanoscience and public policy aspects; nanoparticle transport and fate in the environment; nanohazard assessment and nanotoxicology; environmental engineering applications of nanotechnology: pollutants sensing, monitoring, control and remediation. A project is required.
CIVI 6691 Greenhouse Gases and Control (4 credits)
Topics include physiochemical characteristics of greenhouse gas (GHG) species; GHG emissions, inventories, quantification and management; international and regional standards, protocols, regulations and schemes; GHG information management systems; GHG reuse, recycling, and sequestration; GHG emissions modelling and control planning; available and emerging technologies for reducing GHG emissions. A project is required.
CIVI 6711 Asset Management for Sustainable Civil Infrastructure (4 credits)
Topics include fundamentals of the infrastructure asset management process; strategic planning, location of underground assets, condition assessment and performance indicators, deterioration models, and development of community driven levels of service; life-cycle analysis, integrated infrastructure modelling, optimized intervention plans and budget allocation, asset management software systems. A project is required.
CIVI 691 Topics in Civil Engineering I (4 credits)
Note: Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for these courses, providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number. e.g. CIVI 691A, CIVI 691B, etc.
CIVI 7001 Earthquake Engineering (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6581.
Earthquake ground motion characteristics; behaviour of buildings, bridges, etc., methods and principles of structural dynamics; inelastic action and concept of energy absorption; evaluation of damage; soil structure interaction problems; design methods and code requirements; current research. A project is required.
CIVI 7031 Dynamics of Foundations (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6581.
Principles of soil dynamics; dynamic loads, theory of vibrations and design considerations for foundations of different types; shallow foundations, deep foundations, massive machine bases; problems of soil-structure interaction. A project is required.
CIVI 7101 Theory and Design of Orthotropic Bridges (4 credits)
Prerequisite: CIVI 6101.
Natural and technical orthotropy; orthogonally stiffened plates; methods of bridge analysis and design; materials; specifications; analysis of existing orthotropic structures; numerical examples. A project is required.
CIVI 7111 Theory and Design of Modern Bridge Systems (4 credits)
Prerequisite: CIVI 6101.
Hybrid, post-stressed and composite plate girders and trusses; delta type girders; orthotropic, shell types and tubular bridges, cable-stayed and stiffened cable bridges; optimization of bridge systems; vibrations and damping capacity; aerodynamics and seismic stability; concept of safety; fatigue and carrying capacity; use of models; application of computers. A project is required.
CIVI 7121 Cable Stayed Bridges (4 credits)
Prerequisite: CIVI 6101.
Basic bridge systems; methods of structural analysis; aerodynamic stability; structural details; typical structures. A project is required.
CIVI 7311 Advanced Analysis of Groundwater Flow and Contamination (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENCS 6021.
Groundwater storage and supply; storage in confined aquifers; water table fluctuation; aquifers; steady groundwater hydraulics; aquifer tests and pumping. Groundwater flow equations; conservative and reactive contaminant transport of groundwater systems; analytical and numerical solutions of contaminant transport equations; flow and solute transport in fractured porous media; assessment of environmental impact of waste disposal operations, model implementation strategies. A project is required.
CIVI 7401 Design of Transportation Terminals (4 credits)
Prerequisites: CIVI 6401 or 6411.
Functions of transportation terminals; airports, seaports, public transit terminals; systems approach to passenger and freight terminal design; criteria for evaluating the inter-modal transfer process and user requirements. Simulation models and analytical techniques for quality of service analysis and evaluation of terminal configurations; requirements of new systems; high capacity aircraft; V/STOL aircraft, LRT and HST systems. A project is required.
CIVI 7901 Environmental Engineering Research Project (9 Credits)
Prerequisite: Completion of at least 20 credits in the Environmental Engineering program and permission of the Departmental Graduate Program Director.
This is a research project to be completed under the supervision of a full-time faculty member from the Department. The research topic must be in the field of environmental engineering, and should be selected in consultation and with the approval of a faculty supervisor. The course is graded on the basis of the student’s performance during the work period, which includes a technical report that is assessed by two faculty members in the area.
CIVI 791 Topics in Civil Engineering II (4 credits)
Note: Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for these courses, providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number. e.g. CIVI 691A, CIVI 691B, etc.
CIVI 8011 Doctoral Seminar in Civil Engineering (***)
Grading on a pass/fail basis only. No credit value.
Chemical and Materials Engineering
CHME 6001 Project in Chemical and Materials Engineering (1 credit)
The course consists of an individual project in a chosen area of study in the area of Chemical and Materials Engineering under the supervision of a faculty member. This course may be repeated for credit.
CHME 6011 Advanced Transport Phenomena (4 credits)
Topics include equations of heat, mass, and momentum transfer; viscosity, thermal conductivity and diffusivity in laminar and turbulent conditions; velocity, temperature, and concentration distributions in selected systems; Navier-Stokes equations: direct simulation and turbulence modelling – Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS); turbulence near surfaces and interphase transport; multicomponent mass transfer; transport in porous media; effects of narrow pore size; and the dusty-gas model (DGM). A project is required.
CHME 6021 Advanced Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics (4 credits)
Topics include principles, concepts, and laws/postulates of classical and statistical thermodynamics and their link to applications that require quantitative knowledge of thermodynamic properties from a macroscopic to a molecular level; basic postulates of classical thermodynamics and their application; criteria of stability and equilibria; constitutive property models of pure materials and mixtures, including molecular-level effects using statistical mechanics; equations of state; phase and chemical equilibria of multicomponent systems; and thermodynamics of polymers. Applications are emphasized through extensive problem work relating to practical cases. A project is required.
CHME 6031 Chemical Kinetics and Reaction Engineering (4 credits)
CHME 6041 Chemical Engineering Process Dynamics and Control (4 credits)
Topics include principles of process dynamics and control; step response curves; PID control; strategies for chemical process control; process model identification; dynamic chemical process simulation; model-predictive control algorithms; and assessment of controller performance. A project is required.
CHME 6051 Chemical Process Engineering and Design (4 credits)
Topics include a review of the concepts of industrial chemical process design, engineering economics, process optimization, process simulation and plant safety; the use of fundamental knowledge in science and mathematics to design practical chemical engineering facilities. Special emphasis is placed on safety, hazards, sustainability and loss prevention issues in chemical plants. A project is required.
CHME 6061 Advanced Biochemical Engineering (4 credits)
Topics include the interaction of chemical engineering, biochemistry, and microbiology; mathematical representations of microbial systems. Kinetics of growth, death, and metabolism are also covered, as well as studies of continuous fermentation, agitation, mass transfer, and scale-up in fermentation systems, and enzyme technology. A project is required.
CHME 6071 Materials Science and Engineering (4 credits)
Topics include structure, behaviour and properties of engineering materials – metals, ceramics, polymers and composites; effects of crystalline structure and imperfections; and methods of observing, measuring and interpreting properties of materials. A project is required.
CHME 6081 Advanced Separation Processes (4 credits)
Topics include a review of basic chemical and mechanical separations; multicomponent separations; membrane separations; adsorption; chromatographic separations; and ion exchange. A project is required.
CHME 6091 Statistics for Chemical Engineering (4 credits)
Topics include a review of basic statistics; hypothesis testing; multivariate statistics; linear and nonlinear regression; chemical process model calibration; and response surface methodology. A project is required.
CHME 6101 Advanced Battery Materials and Technologies (4 credits)
Topics include a review of the principles of batteries, fuel cells, and supercapacitors; electrodes and electrolytes; thermodynamics, reaction kinetics, transport phenomena, electrostatics and phase transformations of various energy storage materials, particularly lithium-ion batteries, supercapacitors, and fuel cells; and experimental methods to study key parameters of energy storage materials, focusing on a materials science approach. A project is required.
CHME 6111 Polymer Chemistry and Engineering (4 credits)
Topics include the advanced theory and industrial practice of polymers, polymer chemistry, and polymer reactor engineering. The course covers polymer chemistry and polymerization kinetics for various types of polymerization including condensation, free radical, cationic, anionic, and coordination polymerization; polymerization processes including bulk, solution, emulsion, dispersion, gas phase, and slurry processes; polymer reactor engineering, polymer materials structure and property characterization, and recent developments in the field are included. A project is required.
CHME 6121 Nanomaterials Science and Engineering (4 credits)
Topics include chemical and engineering aspects of nanomaterials. The course covers synthesis, characterization, properties, and applications of a variety of nanomaterials, with a focus on representative inorganic nanomaterials, as well as carbon nanomaterials such as fullerenes, carbon nanotubes, and graphene. A project is required.
CHME 6131 Advanced Colloid and Interface Science and Engineering (4 credits)
Topics include properties of colloids and surfactants; physical and chemical interactions between colloidal particles: attraction and repulsion; stability of colloidal dispersions; coagulation and flocculation; surface and interface tension - wettability; characterization methods of colloidal particles; the relation between interface energy and adsorption; adsorption of surfactants on interfaces; micelles; surfactants in nanotechnology; adsorption in porous media; and surface characterization methods. A project is required.
CHME 6911 Topics in Chemical Engineering I (4 credits)
Note: Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for these courses providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the title of the topic. A project is required.
CHME 7911 Topics in Chemical Engineering II (4 credits)
Note: Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for these courses providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the title of the topic. A project is required.
Electrical and Computer Engineering
COEN 6211 Biological Computing and Synthetic Biology (*) (4 credits)
Introduction to the cell and the genome. Foundations of synthetic biology and ethics. Synthetic genomes and metabolic engineering. Model organisms, such as E. coli bacteria, and synthetic cells: self-replicating cells man-made from cloned genes, a cellular membrane and the basic elements of RNA and protein synthesis. Designing computational devices for implementation in biological cells. Introduction to modelling and computer simulation of gene regulatory networks. Methods of building and testing gene regulatory networks within and without cells. Expanding functionality via inter-cellular signaling. Basic interfacing to electronic sensors and actuators. Landmark and interesting applications of synthetic biology in computer engineering and other disciplines. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for COEN 691A or BIOL 631B (Biological Computing and Synthetic Biology) may not take this course for credit.
COEN 6311 Software Engineering (4 credits)
Software life cycle, software requirements and requirement documentation. Software design: top-down and bottom-up approaches; design validation and design reviews. Software implementation, choice of a programming language and portability. Testing, debugging and verification. Design of test cases. Software documentation and its maintenance. Documentation tools and documentation portability, user interface design. A project is required.
COEN 6312 Model-Driven Software Engineering (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COEN 6311 or COMP 6471 or equivalent.
Model-Driven Architecture (MDA), domain-based system partitioning, Platform-Independent Modelling (PIM), Platform Specific Modelling (PSM), Unified Modelling Language (UML), static and dynamic modelling with UML, UML extension mechanisms, UML profiling, Object Constraint Language (OCL), model transformation, introduction to Query/View/Transformation standard, action specification (OAL), automatic system generation. A project is required.
COEN 6313 Programming on the Cloud (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COEN 6311.
Topics include definition(s) of principles of cloud-based problem solving and programming; autonomy of cloud computing, service and business models, data centres and virtualization; CAP theorem, REST API and data models; MapReduce and programming model, distributed file systems for computer clusters, development environments and tools on clouds; cloud-based access and query; cloud application design principles; applications of cloud service concepts to the  design of a real-world Internet service. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken COEN 691 (Programming on the Cloud) may not take this course for credit.
COEN 6321 Applied Evolutionary and Learning Algorithms (*) (4 credits)
Topics include heuristic learning algorithms applied to real-world problems of design, classification, prediction and abstraction. Genetic algorithms, genetic programming, evolutionary strategies, generative and developmental systems, artificial life approaches, swarm intelligence, self-modifying programs, tabu search, simulated annealing and support vector machines; introduction to deep learning architectures. Examples of practical applications and challenges focused on biological and biomedical engineering. A project is required.
COEN 6331 Neural Networks (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6131.
Fundamentals of artificial neural networks; rigorous analysis of and introduction to various network paradigms: perceptrons, backpropagation, counter-propagation, Hopfield nets, bi-directional associative memories, adaptive resonance theory, cognitron and neocognitron; neural network topologies, memories, learning, stability and convergence; applications to adaptive knowledge, knowledge processing, classification, pattern recognition, signal processing, communications, robotics and control; and assessment of current neural network technology. A project is required.
COEN 6341 Embedded System Modelling (4 credits)
Fundamental issues and state-of-the-art methods, tools and techniques for system-level design of heterogeneous multi-core embedded systems. Modelling at different levels, from abstract specification down to implementation across hardware-software boundaries. Embedded system specification using system-level design languages, SystemC and SpecC. Application modelling and analysis. Embedded multi-core platforms. Transaction-level platform modelling. Processor and RTOS modelling. Communication architecture modelling. A project is required.
COEN 6501 Digital System Design and Synthesis (4 credits)
This course introduces students to VHDL language and modelling digital circuit with VHDL. Topics include: arithmetic and logic circuits. Storage devices. Finite State Machines. Algorithmic State Machines. Timing issues. Asynchronous Design. VHDL and modelling with VHDL. Synthesis and architectural models for synthesis. Project involving system design and modelling. A project is required.
COEN 6511 VLSI Circuit Design (4 credits)
Physical design of digital circuits using technologies of Very Large Scale Integration. CMOS and BiCMOS logic blocks. CMOS processing technology, design rules, CAD issues, and limitation of CMOS technologies. Physical layouts and parasitic elements of CMOS circuits. Characterization and performance evaluation. Electrical simulation using HSPICE. Design and implementation of CMOS logic structures, interconnects, and I/O structures, emphasis on optimizing operation speed and/or power dissipation/distribution. Project of circuit design using a specified CMOS technology. A project is required.
COEN 6521 Design for Testability (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COEN 6501 or COEN 6511.
Stuck-at faults, observability, controllability, fault coverage, test vectors, automatic test pattern generation (ATPG), statistical fault analysis, ad-hoc testing, level sensitive scan design (LSSD), serial scan, parallel scan, signature analysis and BILBO, boundary scan, built-in-self-test (BIST), IDDQ testing. A project is required.
COEN 6531 ASIC Synthesis (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COEN 6501 or COEN 6511.
Introduction to high level synthesis; synthesis models. The synthesis process; High Level Description Languages; scheduling; chaining and pipelining; clock optimization and synthesis; I/O synthesis. Behavioral synthesis; architectural trade-offs in power, area and delay. Design flow with FPGAs; design flow with full-custom and semi-custom ASIC’s. A project is required.
COEN 6541 Functional Hardware Verification (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COEN 6501 or equivalent.
Review of hardware design languages. Definition of functional verification. Design for verification. Writing testbenches, simulation engines, and coverage metrics. Introduction to verification languages. Verification plan: strategies, testcases, testbenches. Modelling verification environments. Modelling input relations, intervals, events. Introduction to formal verification tools. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for COEN 691X (Hardware Functional Verification) may not take this course for credit.
COEN 6551 Formal Hardware Verification (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COEN 6501.
Design verification technology. Introduction to mathematical logic (propositional, first-order, higher-order). Formal methods. Formal specification and validation. Combinational equivalence checking. Binary decision diagrams: BDD, automata theory, sequential equivalence checking, model theory, temporal logics, model checking, proof theory, predicate logic, theorem proving, formal verification CAD tools. Practical case studies. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for COEN 7501 (Hardware Formal Verification) may not take this course for credit.
COEN 6611 Real-time Systems (4 credits)
Taxonomy of real-time systems; Scheduling algorithms for static and dynamic tasks; Fault-tolerance and reliability; Resource and resource access control; Multiprocessor scheduling, resource access control, and synchronization; Real-time communication, Case studies in distributed real-time systems (e.g., HARTS, MARS, Spring, etc.). A project is required.
COEN 6711 Microprocessors and Their Applications (4 credits)
Introduction to microprocessors and their architectures. Examples of various microprocessors. Bus and I/O Organizations. Addressing modes. Timing. Software related issues. Memory and its hierarchy. Static and dynamic memory interfacing. Synchronous and asynchronous interfacing. Interrupts. DMA. Use of Co-processors. Single chip Micro-controllers. Examples of microprocessor applications at the system level. A project is required.
COEN 6721 Fault-Tolerant Distributed Systems (4 credits)
Fundamentals of the design and analysis of fault-tolerant systems, Models for distributed systems, Fault/error models, Techniques for providing hardware/software redundancy, Fault-detection in multi-processors, Stable storage, Recovery strategies for multi-processors (checkpointing), System diagnosis, Software design faults, Experimental validation techniques, Case studies in fault-tolerant distributed systems. A project is required.
COEN 6741 Computer Architecture and Design (4 credits)
Review of basic computer architecture designs. Fundamentals of computer design and performance. Cost issues. Instruction set design principles. Memory hierarchies: registers, caches and virtual memories. Basic processor implementation issues. High performance computing issues such as pipelining, superscalar and vector processing. Input/output subsystem designs. A project is required.
COEN 691 Topics In Computer Engineering I (4 credits)
Note: Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for these courses, providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. COEN 691A, COEN 691B, etc.
COEN 7311 Protocol Design and Validation (4 credits)
Prerequisites: COEN 6311 and ELEC 6851 or COMP 6461.
OSI model, introduction to seven layers, protocols, services. Protocol modelling techniques: FSM models, Petri net models, Hybrid models. Temporal logic. Protocol specification languages of ISO: Estelle model and language. Lotos model and language. Protocol implementation and techniques from formal specification to implementation. Protocol verification techniques: communicating FSM, reachability analysis, verification using checking, protocol design validation. Protocol performance: performance parameters, performance measurement by simulation, extensions to Estelle. Protocol testing: test architectures, test sequences, test sequence languages, test design methodology. A project is required.
COEN 7741 Advanced Computer Architecture (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COEN 6741.
Multiprocessing, Parallel processing, Vector processing, MIMD, SIMD, ILP (Instruction Level Parallelism), Superscalar, VLIW, Multithreading, Systolic processors, etc. A project is required.
COEN 791 Topics In Computer Engineering II (4 credits)
Note: Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for these courses, providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. COEN 791A, COEN 791B, etc.
ELEC 6041 Large-scale Control Systems (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6131 or equivalent.
Introduction to large-scale systems and applications. Model-order reduction and minimal realization. Centralized and decentralized fixed modes (CDMs and DEMs). Characterization and computation of DEMs and approximate DEMs. Structured and unstructured DEMs. Quotient fixed modes and stabilizability of decentralized systems by means of linear time-varying control law. Effects of sampling on decentralized control systems. Centralized and decentralized robust servomechanism problem. Decentralized controller design using pole assignment technique and optimization method. A project is required.
ELEC 6051 Introduction to Analog VLSI (4 credits)
Challenges of IC techniques and of VLSI, BJT and MOS processes. Passive components; network models and simulations. Layout design rules and CAD packages. Switch, active resistor, current mirror and voltage references; differential amplifiers, comparators, operational amplifiers, transinductance amplifiers, voltage to current transducers. Noise considerations. Offset and precision techniques. Applications: RF amplifiers, filters, oscillators, current mode IC networks. A project is required.
ELEC 6061 Real-time Computer Control Systems (4 credits)
Introduction to real-time computer control systems; a review of discrete-time signals and systems, difference equations, z-transform; sampled data systems, sample and hold, discrete models; discrete equivalents of continuous-time systems; stability analysis; design specifications; design using root locus and frequency response methods; implementation issues including bumpless transfer, integral windup, sample rate selection, pre-filtering, quantization effects and computational delay; scheduling theory and priority assignment to control processes, timing of control loops, effects of missed deadlines; principles and characteristics of sensors and devices, embedded processors, processor/device interface. A project is required.
ELEC 6071 Mixed-Signal VLSI for Communication Systems (*) (4 credits)
Topics include overview of wireline communication links, mechanisms of signal degradation, modulation formats, TX/RX synchronization options, IC technology limitations, transmitter front-end circuits, receiver front-end circuits, decision circuits, clock and data recovery systems, phase-locked loops, jitter, continuous-time and discrete-time equalizers, system metrics. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for ELEC 691N (Mixed-Signal VLSI for Communication Systems) may not take this course for credit.
ELEC 6081 Modern Analog Filter Design (4 credits)
Review of network analysis. Magnitude and frequency scaling. Magnitude and phase approximation in synthesis of filter functions. Second order active RC filters. Synthesis of all-pole LC ladder filters. Second order switched capacitor filters. Integrated circuit filters. A project is required.
ELEC 6091 Discrete Event Systems (4 credits)
Introduction to discrete-event systems (DES). Modelling (languages, automata and Petri nets). Supervisory control (controllability, modular control and control under partial observation). Architecture (decentralized and hierarchical schemes). Petri nets (modelling and analysis). Timed models. A project is required.
ELEC 6111 Detection and Estimation Theory (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENCS 6161.
Basic hypothesis testing, cost functions, Bayes and Neyman Pearson tests, the power of a test, sequential tests; estimation, Bayes estimates, maximum a posteriori estimates; the Cramer-Rao inequality, maximum likelihood estimates; composite hypothesis testing, application of estimation theory to phase locked loops, vector representation of signals in noise, application of the Kharhunen-Loeve expansion, complex analytic representation of signals; detection and estimation of signals in white and non-white noise, the matched filter, composite hypothesis testing, random amplitude and phase, multi-path channels, waveform estimation, Wiener filters, Kalman filters. A project is required.
ELEC 6131 Error Detecting and Correcting Codes (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENCS 6161 or ELEC 6831.
Introduction to abstract algebra; linear block codes: cyclic, BCH, and Reed-Solomon codes; convolutional codes; TCM codes; introduction to iterative based codes; turbo codes, LDPC codes; trade-offs between power, bandwidth, data rate and system reliability. A project is required.
ELEC 6141 Wireless Communications (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6831.
Topics include wireless radio link analysis; receiver sensitivity and receiver noise sources; path loss, shadowing, and fading models; area coverage and range calculation; introduction to cellular systems: frequency reuse, trunking and grade of service, sectoring and cell splitting, coverage and capacity. Modulation techniques for mobile communications, spread-spectrum techniques; multiplexing and multiple access techniques; wireless standards from first generation to fourth generation; OFDM: an architecture for the fourth generation. A project is required.
ELEC 6151 Information Theory and Source Coding (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENCS 6161.
Entropy of a source, rate distortion functions, source coding, analog to digital conversion, effects of sampling and quantization, vector quantization, discrete memoryless channels and their capacity, cost functions, channel coding theorem, channel capacity, fundamental concepts of information theory with applications to digital communications, theory of data compression, broadcast channels, application to encryption, DES, public key encryption, computational complexity. A project is required.
ELEC 6171 Modelling and Analysis of Telecommunications Networks (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENCS 6161.
Application of queuing theory to the analysis of the performance of telecommunication systems; Poisson arrival process and its properties; Birth-death processes applied to queuing, service distributions; performance measures of a queuing systems; examples of queuing systems in equilibrium; finite and infinite server and population models; Erlang blocking formulae; method of stages.; Networks of queues; product-form solution for open and closed queuing networks; computational algorithms for queuing networks; the imbedded Markov chain technique applied to queues with general service distribution, analysis of multiple access techniques, TDMA, FDMA, polling, CDMA, ALOHA and CSMA. A project is required.
ELEC 6181 Real-time and Multimedia Communication over Internet (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6851.
Review of Internet architecture and protocols. Network impairments: jitter and delay. RTP: transport protocols for real-time data. Packet scheduling, QoS in the Internet: differentiated services, integrated services, Resource reservation protocol (RSVP), Multi protocol label switching (MPLS). Voice/Fax/Video over IP. Internet-to-PSTN. Protocols and standards - H.323, Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) and Media Gateway Control Protocol (MGCP). Internet telephony signaling. Interoperability issues. A project is required.
ELEC 6221 Solid State Devices (*) (4 credits)
Junction theory (PN junctions, Schottky and ohmic contacts, heterojunctions). Structures and characteristics of diodes, solar cells, bipolar transistors, and fundamentals of MOSFETs. Planar silicon junctions and transistors will be designed, fabricated and evaluated in the laboratory, including resistivity measurements, semiconductor cleaning, oxidation, diffusion, photolithography, etching, metallization, and the comparison of design with experimental results. A project is required.
ELEC 6231 Design of Integrated Circuit Components (*) (4 credits)
The structure, characteristics, and design of MOS capacitors and MOSFETs, FinFETs, SOI FETs, velocity-modulation transistors, and HFETs. Role of strain in operation of modern FETs. Planar MOS devices, including capacitors and MOSFETs will be designed, fabricated and evaluated in the laboratory. A project is required.
ELEC 6241 VLSI Process Technology (*) (4 credits)
Introduction to basic VLSI technologies; crystal growth, thermal oxidation, diffusion, ion implantation, chemical vapour deposition, wet and dry etching, and lithography. Layout, yield, and VLSI process integration. The lab demonstrates a semiconductor device fabrication process. A project is required.
ELEC 6251 Microtransducer Process Technology (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6231 or ELEC 6241.
Overview of micromachining process. Bulk-micromachined structures and devices. Anisotropic etching of silicon; phenomena, processes, geometry, crystal physics. Surface-micromachined structures, devices, processes. CMOS-compatible micromachining. Case-study examples. A project is required.
ELEC 6261 Optical Devices for High-Speed Communications (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6221 or equivalent.
Overview of optical properties of semiconductors. The fundamental principles for understanding and applying optical fiber technology, fundamental behaviour of the individual optical components and their interactions with other devices. Lasers, LED’s, optical fibers, light detectors, optical switches. Concepts and components of WDM and DWDM. A comprehensive treatment of the underlying physics such as noise and distortion in optical communications, light polarization, modulation and attenuation. A project is required.
ELEC 6271 Nanoscience and Nanotechnology: Opto-Electronic Devices (4 credits)
This course covers the fundamental principles of nanoscience and nanotechnology which include principles of quantum mechanics and quantum properties of solid state materials. Properties of metal and semiconducting nanoparticles and their synthesis; Carbon nanostructures and nanotubes; bulk nanostructured materials; Solid disordered nanostructures and nanostructured crystals; quantum wells, quantum wires, and quantum dots and their physical properties; preparation of quantum nanostructures, Introduction to NanoElectroMechanical Systems (NEMS), nanomachining and fabrication of nanodevices. A project is required.
ELEC 6281 Principles of Solid State Nanodevices (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6271 or equivalent.
Theoretical basis of nanodevices. Overview of fundamental quantum phenomena in semiconductors. Electronics in low-dimensional structures (two-dimensional electron gas, quantum wire and dots, electron scattering, transport). High-speed electron devices based on quantum structures (nanoscale MOSFETs, high-electron-mobility transistors, resonant-tunneling diodes and transistors, superlattice-based transistors). Logic gates based on quantum devices. Quantum optoelectronics (optical transitions in quantum structures, quantum well, quantum dots photodetectors and lasers, quantum cascade lasers). Single electron devices. Carbon nanotube transistors, molecular electronics and spintronics. Nanodevice technology and characterization. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for ELEC 691X (Principles of Solid State Nanodevices) may not take this course for credit.
ELEC 6301 Advanced Electromagnetics (4 credits)
Maxwell's equations and boundary conditions. Theorems: uniqueness, reciprocity, surface and volume equivalence. Vector potentials and solution of the homogeneous and inhomogeneous wave equations. Waveguides and scattering formulations in rectangular and cylindrical coordinates. Dielectric waveguides. Physical optics. Selected topics in integral and differential equations, ray-optical techniques, and computational methods. Applications to antennas and microwaves. A project is required.
ELEC 6311 Radiation and Scattering of Waves (4 credits)
Construction of Green’s functions. Canonical problems – waveguide, cylinder, wedge, dielectric slab. Sommerfeld integrals. Impedance boundary conditions. Surface and leaky waves. Asymptotics, method of steepest descent, method of stationary phase. High-frequency uniform asymptotic methods. Geometrical theory of diffraction. Edge diffraction, creeping waves. Applications to problems in antennas, computational electromagnetics, electromagnetic compatibility, propagation, and scattering. A project is required.
ELEC 6341 Antennas (*) (4 credits)
Antenna fundamentals and definitions. Radiation integrals. Dipoles and loops. Arrays. Antenna self and mutual inductance. Matching techniques. Travelling wave antennas. Broadband antennas. Equivalence principle. Aperture antennas. Numerical techniques. Antenna measurement techniques. A project is required.
ELEC 6351 Modern Antenna Theory (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6341.
Helmholtz equation, Green’s function, current element, the ideal dipole, radiation impedance, gain directivity, reciprocity, polarization. Half-wave dipole, antennas above ground, small loop antenna, arrays of antenna, array factor, pattern multiplication array synthesis, mutual impedance, aperture antenna. Hallens integral equation, Pocklingons equation, numerical solution by the method of weighted residuals, and by the moment method, wire grids. Magnetic field integral equation and solid surfaces. Aperture antennas, aperture integration, geometrical optics, physical optics. Geometrical theory of diffraction, wedge diffraction coefficients, applications, multiple diffraction and diffraction by curved surfaces. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for ELEC 7341 may not take this course for credit.
ELEC 6361 Acoustics (*) (4 credits)
Sound generation and propagation in elastic media; conversion between acoustical, electric and mechanical energy. Lumped-parameter approximations, sound in rooms, underwater acoustics, microphones; loudspeakers and audio communications problems; noise and vibration control problems. A project is required.
ELEC 6371 Design of Wireless RF Systems (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6391.
Introduction to wireless systems. Noise and distortion in microwave systems. Antennas and propagation. Amplifiers. Mixers. Transistor oscillators and frequency synthesizers. Modulation techniques. Receiver design. Use of RF CAD tools. A project is required.
ELEC 6381 Techniques in Electromagnetic Compatibility (4 credits)
Introduction to EMC procedures, control plans and specifications. Radiated and conducted susceptibility and emission testing. Introduction EMC antennas, antenna concepts, electric and magnetic dipoles, biconical dipoles, conical log spiral antennas, setting up fields for susceptibility testing, measuring radiation from equipment. Coupled transmission lines, pulse propagation, closely spaced parallel transmission lines, capacitive coupling, inductive coupling, shielding against magnetic fields. Shielding and enclosures, electric and magnetic field screening mechanisms, shielding effectiveness, grounding considerations. EMC test facilities, screened rooms, TEM cells. Signals and spectra, intermodulation, cross-modulation, the spectrum analyzer. Noise and pseudo-random noise, noise performance of measurement/receiving systems, noise equivalent bandwidth, noise figure, antenna noise temperature and S/N ratio. A project is required.
ELEC 6391 Microwave Engineering (*) (4 credits)
Properties of waveguides, striplines and microstrips. Scattering parameters. Butterworth and Chebyshev impedance transformers. Microwave couplers, cavities, and Fabry-Perot resonators. Periodic structures. Microwave filter design. Faraday rotation and non-reciprocal devices. A project is required.
ELEC 6411 Power Electronics I (*) (4 credits)
Introduction to power electronic systems. Semiconductor switches. Basic power converter configurations. Line commutated controlled and uncontrolled ac-dc rectifiers. Basic dc-dc converters. Pulse width modulation techniques. Basic dc-ac converters. Switching power supplies. Applications to industrial power supplies and motor drives. A project is required.
ELEC 6421 Renewable Energy Systems (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6411.
This course covers electrical basics and models of solar energy (photo-voltaics); electrical power from wind energy (including turbine operation); electrical power from wave and tidal energy; electrical power from micro-hydro and biomass waste to energy. Fundamental energy equations will be derived from physics and the electrical power equations developed. Engineering design implications will be discussed. Design assignments are given to reinforce the engineering design based on fundamental physics. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for ELEC 691Z (Renewable Energy Systems) may not take this course for credit.
ELEC 6431 Advanced Electrical Machines and Drives (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6471 or ELEC 6491.
Transient modelling of electrical machines. ABC, Park’s transform and d,q, two axis modelling of synchronous and induction machines. Application of the advanced models to machine transients, for example, direct on line starting or reclosing operation. Vector control of AC machines including permanent magnet machines. Differences between permanent magnet AC and brushless DC machines. Switched reluctance motor modelling and operation. Modelling of losses in machines. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for ELEC 691K may not take this course for credit.
ELEC 6461 Power Electronics II (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6411.
Circuits and operating principles of self commutated dc-dc and dc-ac converters. One and four quadrant dc-dc converters. Single-phase and three-phase voltage source and current source inverters. Pulse width modulation strategies. Resonant converters. Soft switching techniques. Isolated dc-dc converters. Application to switch-mode power supplies, uninterruptible power supplies and ac motor drives. A project is required.
ELEC 6471 Hybrid Electric Vehicle Power System Design and Control (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6411.
Introduction to Electric Vehicles (EV), Hybrid Electric Vehicles (HEV). Vehicle design fundamentals. Traction motors for EV/HEV propulsion. On-board energy sources and storage devices: high-voltage traction batteries, fuel cells, ultra-capacitors, flywheels. Power electronic converters and control. Various EV/HEV/Fuel Cell Vehicle topologies and modelling. Energy management strategies. Practical design considerations. Engineering impact of electric, hybrid electric, and fuel cell vehicles. A project is required.
ELEC 6481 Computer-Aided Analysis and Design of Electric Machines (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6411.
This course uses machine design software to aid in the analysis and design of electrical machines, which is offered in a computer-aided design (CAD) environment. The emphasis is on the design of electrical machines for renewable energy and electric vehicle applications. Emphasis is placed on permanent-magnet and switched reluctance machines, although machines of importance, like the induction machine, are also discussed. Magnetic equivalent circuits for a magnet and a typical machine radial field geometry are developed which lead naturally to sizing equations. Other geometries and Eddy current and hysteresis core loss models are presented. The torque angle curves of the switched reluctance machine are developed, which lead to design concepts. The synchronous reluctance machine is introduced. A project is required.
ELEC 6491 Controlled Electric Drives (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6411.
Elements of a drive system; characteristics of common mechanical systems; drive characteristics; operation in one, two or four quadrants. Fully controlled rectifier drives; braking of DC motors; control of DC motors using DC/DC converters. Control of polyphase induction motors; voltage-source and current source inverter drives; frequency-controlled induction motor drives; introduction to vector control of induction motor drives; field oriented control (FOC); sensor-less operation. Control of synchronous motors; permanent magnet motors. Switched reluctance motor (SRM) drives; stepper motors. Brush-less DC (BLDC) motor drives; low-power electronic motor drives. A project is required.
ELEC 6601 Digital Signal Processing (4 credits)
Discrete-time signals and systems, difference equation; the discrete Fourier series and transform; the Z-transform and LTI systems; sampling of continuous-time signals. Reconstruction of signals using interpolation, sampling of discrete-time signals, discrete-time decimation and interpolation, changing the sampling rate by integer and non-integer factor; multirate signal processing, polyphase decomposition, multirate filter banks; digital processing of analog signals, A/D and D/A converters; linear phase and non-linear phase systems, all-pass and minimum phase systems; recursive and non-recursive digital filters, common digital filter structures, common design approaches for digital filters; random signals; linear adaptive filters, Weiner and Least-Mean-Square filters. A project is required.
ELEC 6611 Digital Filters (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6601.
Approximation and design of recursive and non-recursive digital filters. Transformations. Stability. Digital filter structures including wave and lattice structures. Effect of quantization, noise and limit cycles. Hardware implementation. Digital filter applications. A project is required.
ELEC 6621 Digital Waveform Compression (4 credits)
Prerequisites: ELEC 6601; ENCS 6161.
Numerical representation of waveform information; common waveform communication systems; statistical models used for waveforms; visual psychophysics. Differential PCM, motion estimation/compensation for video compressions. Transform coding: run length coding, Huffman and arithmetic coding, control of Q factor and Q table, segmentation/contour/edge based coding; pre-processing and post-processing strategies. Vector quantization. Sub-band coding and Wavelet Transform. Zero trees. Channel concerns: robustness, error recovery, masking video/image bit rate source models. Coding of two-level graphics. Review of standards: JPEG, MPEG, H.261. A project is required.
ELEC 6631 Video Processing and Compression (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6601.
Topics include frequency analysis video signals, colour video models; TV and video capture and display, spatial-temporal basic operations, elementary visual features; vector matrix video notation; frequency response of human vision; theory of video sampling, video quality assessment; motion modelling and estimation; temporal frame prediction, video filtering, high-dynamic-range video; fundamentals of video compression, transform coding, predictive coding, recent video compression standards, digital TV, advanced topics. A project is required.
ELEC 6641 Two-dimensional Signal and Image Processing (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6601.
Two-dimensional signals and systems: linear system fundamentals, Fourier analysis of two-dimensional signals, discrete Fourier transform, two-dimensional FIR and IIR filter design and implementations. Image enhancement and restoration: smoothing and sharpening, noise reduction, order statistics filtering, inverse filtering, Wiener filtering, constrained least-square filtering. Wavelets and filter banks: multiresolution concept, perfect reconstruction, one- and two-dimensional wavelet transforms. Introduction to image compression: lossy and lossless compression, image compression standards. Introduction to image segmentation and edge detection. Color image processing: color image representation, color space conversion, pseudo and full color image processing. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken ELEC 7631 may not take this course for credit.
ELEC 6651 Adaptive Signal Processing (4 credits)
Prerequisites: ELEC 6601; ENCS 6161.
Optimal filtering; adaptive filter structures; linear prediction; lattice structures; Levinson recursion. The LMS-based algorithms; basic LMS and properties; mean-square error surface; stability and convergence behavior; normalized LMS; affine projection. Recursive least-square methods; method of least-squares; block least-squares methods. Frequency-domain and sub-band adaptive filters. Kalman filtering. Applications of adaptive filters. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken ELEC 7601 may not take this course for credit.
ELEC 6661 Medical Image Processing (*) (4 credits)
Topics include principles and techniques used in the processing and analysis of medical images; image quality metrics, denoising medical images, quantification, rigid and deformable registration; similarity metrics such as mutual information (MI); images from the most common medical imaging modalities (X-ray, CT, MRI and ultrasound) will be used. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken ELEC 691 (Medical Image Processing) may not take this course for credit.
ELEC 6671 Biological Signal Processing (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6601.
This course covers signal processing through discussion of current bioengineering activities which rely on signal processing and include assessment of neural function with simultaneous collection of electroencephalogram (EEG) and functional MRI data; the noninvasive assessment of cardiac autonomic regulation using electrocardiography; assessment of neural function using near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS); assessment of muscle activity using electromyography (EMG). Topics include modern spectral analysis, time-frequency analysis (short-time Fourier transforms and wavelets); signal modelling; multivariate analyses and adaptive filtering. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for ELEC 691 (Biological Signal Processing) may not take this course for credit.
ELEC 6831 Digital Communications (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6601.
Topics include random processes and linear systems; baseband modulation/demodulation, optimal receivers in AWGN, correlation and matched-filter receivers, pulse shaping for band-limited channels; bandpass modulation techniques such as PAM, PSK, DPSK, FSK, QAM; synchronization, timing and carrier recovery, maximum-likelihood carrier phase and symbol timing estimation; error control coding, linear block codes, syndrome-based decoding, system bit error rate and coding gain. A project is required.
ELEC 6841 Advanced Digital Communications (4 credits)
Prerequisites: ELEC 6831; ENCS 6161.
Digital signaling over band-limited channels: signal design for band-limited channels, maximum likelihood sequence detection, equalization techniques, e.g., zero-forcing, minimum mean squared error, adaptive equalization. Advanced coding and modulation: concatenated coding with iterative decoding, coded modulation techniques. Diversity techniques for fading channels. Synchronization techniques: carrier and timing recovery, frequency estimation techniques, frame and network synchronization, maximum-likelihood estimation and Cramer-Rao bounds. A project is required.
ELEC 6851 Telecommunications Networks (4 credits)
Communication Networks and Services; Introduction to Layered Network Architectures; Transmission systems and the Telephone Network: multiplexing circuit switching, routing and signaling; Peer-to-Peer Protocols: ARQ protocols, data link controls, packet multiplexing, Multiple Access Communications: Aloha, CSMA, reservation schemes, polling, token-passing ring, LAN standards, LAN Bridges; Packet-switching Networks: Datagrams and virtual circuits; TCP/IP Architecture: Internet protocol, transmission control protocol. A project is required.
ELEC 6861 Higher Layer Telecommunications Protocols (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6851.
Broadband communications: concept, issues, signaling techniques, examples. Multimedia communications: traffic characteristics, classes, issues (e.g. QOS) and architectures. Internetworking: issues, architectures (e.g. router, bridge, gateway), protocols and standards: ISO, IP and IPv6. Network Management: issues, architecture, management information base (MIBs), SNMP, TMN and CMIP. Advanced topics, such as policy approach for network management. A project is required.
ELEC 6871 Fiber-Optic Communication Systems and Networks (4 credits)
Overview of the basics of optical transmitters, optical receivers, optical fibers, optical amplifiers, and SDH/SONET. Design of optical fiber amplifiers: fiber Raman amplifiers and Erbium-doped fiber amplifiers (EDFA), theories, configurations, simulation, designs, applications, requirements for optical networks. Optical transmitters: characteristics and requirements for optical networks. Optical receivers: characteristics, requirements, noise analysis. Optical systems and performance: system architectures, design guidelines, long-haul systems, dispersion management. Coherent optical systems: ASK, FSK, DPSK, system performance. DWDM systems and networks: WAN and MAN system performance, TDM, subcarrier multiplexing, CDMA, WDM network design, network survivability. Optical solition systems: fiber solitions, loss-managed solitions, dispersion-managed solitions, impact of amplifier noise, high-speed solition system. Photonic packet switching: OTDM synchronization, header processing, burst switching. Access optical networks: architectures, PON. A project is required.
ELEC 6881 Fundamentals and Applications of MIMO Communications (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6141 or ELEC 6841.
Multiple Input Multiple Output (MIMO) communication systems and wireless channel models; Diversity techniques and array processing; MIMO channel capacity; Space-time black and trellis codes; Spatial multiplexing and layered space-time architectures, diversity-versus-multiplexing tradeoff; Differential and unitary space-time coding; MIMO OFDM and space-frequency coding; Concatenated coding and iterative decoding for MIMO systems; Applications of MIMO in wireless systems. A project is required.
ELEC 6891 Broadcast Signal Transmission (*) (4 credits)
This course covers signal definition, human eye limitations, pixel representation schemes, serial digital interface (SDI); image formats (1080i, 720i, 4k, 8k); compression schemes: H.264/265; modulation and coding techniques used in broadcasting. Terrestrial transmission standards such as DVB-T2, ATSC-3; satellite broadcasting standards such as DVB/S2; MPEG transport stream (MPEG-TS), program specific information (PSI), program ID (PID), program association tables (PAT), program map table (PMT), conditional access, program, program clock reference (PCR); multiplexing and IP encapsulation, single program transport stream (SPTS) and multiple program transport stream (MPTS); video storage and retrieval. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for ELEC 691DD (Transmission in Broadcast Signal) may not take this course for credit.
ELEC 691 Topics in Electrical Engineering I (4 credits)
See Note in Topic Area E02
ELEC 6961 Graduate Seminar in Electrical and Computer Engineering (1 credit)
Students must attend a set of seminars identified by the Department and submit a comprehensive report on topics presented in one of these seminars. The report, including an abstract, must be suitably documented and illustrated, should be at least 1000 words in length, must be typewritten on one side of 21.5 cm by 28 cm white paper of quality, and must be enclosed in binding. Students are referred to Form and Style: Thesis, Reports, Term Papers, fourth edition by Campbell and Ballou, published by Houghton Mifflin. Seminar: two hours per week.
ELEC 7151 Broadband Communications Networks (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6171.
Characterization of traffic sources, data, voice and video; ATM protocol architecture, ATM switching architectures, performance evaluation of the ATM multiplexer; Call admission control in ATM networks; Traffic management in ATM, TCP/IP over ATM and wireless ATM Fluid flow approximation, z-transform techniques, and blocking for multiclass flows. A project is required.
ELEC 7441 Design of Power Electronic Circuits (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6461.
Design driving factors. Characteristics of basic converter topologies, including resonant and soft switching circuits. Characteristics and limitations of power semiconductors as switching devices. Design considerations for gate drives, snubbers, power filters and protection circuits. Printed circuit board and thermal design. Application to the practical design of typical power converter systems. A project is required.
ELEC 7451 Power System Compensation (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6411.
Steady state and dynamic characteristics of transmission systems. Theory of line compensation and reactive power control; series and shunt passive compensation. Principles of operation of static compensators and basic configurations; series, shunt and shunt-series. Flexible ac transmission systems (FACTS). Line and self commutated controllers; configurations and control aspects. Applications to distribution systems. Performance evaluation and practical applications of static compensators. A project is required.
ELEC 791 Topics in Electrical Engineering II (4 credits)
See Note in Topic Area E02
ELEC 8011 Doctoral Seminar in Electrical Engineering (***)
Grading on a Pass/Fail basis only. No credit value.
Engineering and Computer Science
ENCS 5721 Composition and Argumentation for Engineers (3 credits)
Fundamentals of English composition and argumentation: grammar, reasoning and persuasion; persuasive proofs; argumentation; structuring and outlining: the problem statement; the body; and the conclusions. Language and persuasion for effective communication in professional engineering. Cultivation of a writing style firmly based on clear and critical thinking skills. Lectures: three hours per week.
Note: This course cannot be taken within the credit requirements of the program. Students who have taken ENCS 591A (Composition and Argumentation for Engineers) may not take this course for credit.
ENCS 6001 Elements of Engineering Mathematics (3 credits)
Functions of one variable, Taylor’s series expansion, review of differentiation, integration and solution of ordinary differential equations. Functions of several variables, partial derivatives, multiple integrals, introduction to partial differential equations, wave equation and diffusion equation. Matrix and vector analysis, characteristic value problems, orthogonal functions; introduction to statistics and numerical methods. Lectures: three hours per week.
ENCS 6021 Engineering Analysis (4 credits)
Sturm-Liouville problem; orthogonal functions; ordinary differential equations with variable coefficients and power series solutions; integral transforms; partial differential equations; boundary value problems; applications to engineering problems. A project is required.
ENCS 6031 Cultures of Engineering Practice (4 credits)
Topics include historical emergence of engineering throughout the world; cross-cultural dimensions of contemporary engineering practice; qualitative research methods for cultural analysis; technical communication across cultures. Case studies and a project are required.
ENCS 6041 Creativity, Innovation, and Critical Thinking (4 credits)
Explanations of innovative and creativity thinking; approaches to problem solving, psychology of invention; diffusion of innovation; leadership through critical thinking; design creativity; modern and historical examples of innovation; and cognitive approaches to scientific and technological thinking. A project is required.
ENCS 6042 Communication Techniques for the Innovation Process (4 credits)
This course introduces theories of client-centred design. Topics and skills covered include qualitative data collection, customer development communication, and user interview techniques. Students will have hands-on experience in customer validation, audience appropriate message creation, and advanced presentation techniques for the innovation process. A project is required.
ENCS 6043 Seminar in Innovation Process (1 credit)
Prerequisites or co-requisites: ENCS 6041 and ENCS 6042.
Registration is restricted to students enrolled in the Graduate Certificate in Innovation, Technology and Society.
The seminar integrates theoretical concepts in innovation and communication processes in preparation for projects in the certificate practicum.
ENCS 6044 Practicum in Innovation Process (6 credtis)
Prerequisites: ENCS 6041, 6042 and 6043.
Registration is restricted to students enrolled in the Graduate Certificate in Innovation, Technology and Society.
The practicum takes place in the Concordia District 3 Centre for Innovation and Entrepreneurship. Students develop innovation projects under the supervision of academic advisors and District 3 instructional personnel. This course is graded on a pass/fail basis.
ENCS 6111 Numerical Methods (4 credits)
Numerical solution of partial differential equations; weighted residuals techniques with emphasis on finite differences and finite elements; convergence, stability and consistency analysis; solution of integral equations; boundary value problems; discrete Fourier series and fast Fourier transform. A project is required.
ENCS 6141 Probabilistic Methods in Design (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENCS 6011 or equivalent.
Elements of probability theory, decision models, expected costs and benefits, models from random occurrences, extreme value statistics, Monte Carlo simulation, reliability analysis, general applications to engineering design problems. A project is required.
ENCS 6161 Probability and Stochastic Processes (4 credits)
Axioms and rules of probabilities, Bayes’ Theorem, binary communication systems, Bernoulli trials and Poisson Theorem, random variables, distributions and density functions, moments, correlation, Chebyshev and Markov’s inequalities, characteristic functions, Chernoff inequality, transformation of random variable, random processes, stationarity, Bernoulli, Random Walk, Poisson, shot noise, random telegraph, and Wiener processes, stopping time; Wald’s equation, elements of Renewal Theory, Mean-Ergodic Theorem, auto and cross-correlation functions, correlation time, auto-correlation receiver, Wiener-Khinchin Theorem, power spectral density, linear system with stochastic inputs, matched filtering. Project: two hours per week.
Note: Students who have received credit for ELEC 6161 may not take this course for credit.
ENCS 6181 Optimization Techniques I (*) (4 credits)
The optimization problem; classical optimization; one dimensional search techniques; unconstrained gradient techniques; quadratically convergent minimization algorithms; constrained optimization; constrained gradient techniques; penalty-function methods; applications. Project: two hours per week.
ENCS 6191 Fuzzy Sets and Fuzzy Logic (4 credits)
Fuzzy sets, operations on fuzzy sets, fuzzy relations; fuzzy logic: connectives, implication functions, representation of fuzzy rules and fuzzy logic based reasoning; fuzzy logic in planning and control: Zadeh’s Generalized Modus Ponens type reasoning, Mamdani type reasoning, fuzzy clustering based system identification and Sugeno type reasoning; case studies. Projects on selected applications.
ENCS 6721 Technical Writing and Research Methods for Scientists and Engineers (3 credits)
This course provides graduate students with the research writing and presentation skills that are essential in academic and professional contexts. Students develop expertise and confidence in research methods, critical reading, crafting thesis statements, leading and participating in discussions, revision/editing and peer review, maintaining research dossiers and report writing.
Note: This course cannot be taken within the credit requirements of any graduate Engineering and Computer Science program, with the exception of the Diploma in Computer Science, the Master of Engineering and the Master of Applied Computer Science. Students who have taken ENCS 591B (Technical Writing and Research Methods) may not take this course for credit.
ENCS 6811 Optical Networking: Architectures and Protocols (4 credits)
This course introduces advanced concepts and protocols of modern telecommunication networks based on Photonic technology. The basics of optical communications networks will be introduced, including the enabling technology, and the main emphasis will be on network architectures and associated protocols. This includes: orientation of transport networks and their evolution (Ring and Mesh topologies); Wavelength Division Multiplexing (WDM); wavelength-routed networks; wavelength conversion; lightpath routing protocols (static, dynamic, adaptive routing and traffic grooming) and optimization problems; control and management protocols and distributed provisioning; survivable network design (proactive and reactive); fault-management and various network restoration protocols; convergence of optical networks and the Internet (IP/WDM) and Generalized Multi Protocol Label Switching (G-MPLS). There will be various assignments in which students will be involved in research projects. Knowledge of telecommunication systems and a background in network simulation is needed. Project.
ENCS 6821 Development and Global Engineering (4 credits)
This is an introductory course in international development and global engineering for graduate students. Topics may include evolution of development, globalization, development projects, planning and analysis, and participatory data gathering. A project is required.
ENCS 691 Topics in Engineering and Computer Science (4 credits)
Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the topic title following the course number on the student record, e.g. ENCS 691 Course Topic: Environment and Social Sustainability.
ENCS 6931 Industrial Stage and Training (9 credits)
Prerequisite: Completion of at least twenty credits in the program and permission of the Departmental Co-op Program Director.
This is an integral component of the Industrial Experience option that is to be completed under the supervision of an experienced engineer/computer scientist in the facilities of a participating company (a Canadian work permit is required).
Each student receives an assessment from the Departmental Co-op Program Director in consultation with the industry supervisor and the faculty advisor. Grading is on a pass/fail basis based on a proposal, monthly progress reports, a final report and a presentation.
ENCS 8011 PhD Seminar (****) (2 credits)
Prerequisite: ENCS 8511 Doctoral Research Proposal.
The PhD Seminar is designed to train students to communicate the results of their research projects to the community and participate in research discussions. This is done when the students have sufficiently progressed into their research, normally after 6 (12 for part-time students) months of being admitted to candidacy, which is normally after 24 (48 for part-time students) months of residency, and must be completed before the submission of the thesis. The student’s evaluation, reflected by either a pass or fail grade, is based upon attendance in all seminars, a report on the student’s thesis research under the direction of the thesis supervisor(s), and a presentation.
Note: Students who have completed ENCS 8011 prior to September 2005 may not take this Seminar for credit.
ENCS 8501 Comprehensive Examination (No credit value)
See Requirements for the Degree in Engineering Programs section.
ENCS 8511 Doctoral Research Proposal (6 credits)
The goal of the doctoral research proposal is to focus the student’s PhD research. The proposal must include an extensive critical review of previous work on the subject of the thesis, and a detailed research plan of action and expected milestones. Students are required to defend their doctoral research proposal before a committee that will normally be comprised of the same members as the comprehensive examination committee.
Note: Students admitted prior to September 1997 are not allowed to substitute ENCS 8511 for an equivalent course work.
ENGR 6071 Switched and Hybrid Control Systems (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6131 or equivalent.
Review of linear control design techniques for nonlinear systems and their limitations; introduction to Lyapunov stability, Lyapunov functions and LaSalle’s invariance principle; introduction to switched and hybrid systems using piecewise-affine systems as a motivating example; modelling and simulation of switched and hybrid systems; switching policies, hybrid automata and executions; Lyapunov stability analysis of switched and hybrid systems; stability as a convex optimization problem; Lyapunov-based control of switched and hybrid systems; controller design as a non-convex problem; stability analyses and the controller design problems; dynamic programming and optimal control techniques; extensive examples from simplified models of industrial problems in the aeronautical, automotive and process industries. The course includes a computer aided controller design project.
ENGR 6131 Linear Systems (*) (4 credits)
State-space representation of dynamic systems, canonical realizations, solutions, modal decomposition, stability. Controllability and observability, minimal realizations, state feedback, pole placement, observers, observer-based controllers. Introduction to optimal control, linear quadratic regulator, the Kalman filter. Limitation on performance of control systems, introduction to robustness. A project is required.
ENGR 6141 Nonlinear Systems (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6131.
Dynamic systems: definitions and notations; nonlinear differential equations; Lipschitz continuity; linearization; describing functions; phase plane analysis; Lyapunov stability; Popov and circle criteria; limit cycles. A project is required.
ENGR 6161 Sensors and Actuators (4 credits)
Elements of smart sensors and systems and their structures; properties of various smart materials including piezoelectric, pyroelectric, shape memory alloys, Rheological fluids, piezoresistive and magnetostrictive; physical and mathematical basis of smart materials; characterization of smart multi-functional materials; sensors and actuators in mechatronics; design and fabrication of sensors and actuators by micromachining; survey of classical system theory; design of sensors and actuators for applications in industrial and medical robotics, haptics, and other systems such as aerospace and smart structures. The students are required to undertake a project work involving design of smart sensors/actuators for specific applications.
ENGR 6191 Introduction to Biomedical Engineering (4 credits)
The origin and characteristics of biological potentials: nerve, muscle, heart, brain; the measurement of biological events; instrumentation systems: electrical safety, biomechanics, biomaterials, orthopaedic engineering; biomedical engineering applications/implications in industry. Project on a current topic.
ENGR 6201 Fluid Mechanics (4 credits)
Fundamental concepts of fluid mechanics; transport phenomena; stress-strain relation; equations of motion; exact solutions; dynamic similarity; specialized equations; laminar boundary layers; flow over immersed bodies; introduction to turbulent flow. Projects on selected topics.
ENGR 6221 Microfluidic Systems (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6201 or equivalent.
Introduction to microfluidics: continuum fluid mechanics, non-continuum regimes, molecular approach. Review of classical fluid mechanics: gas flows, liquid flows, two-phase flows. Microfluidic effects: low Reynolds number flows and chaotic mixing, electrokinetics, surface tension effects and electrowetting. Electrostatic/electromagnetic/piezoelectric actuation of microfluidic systems. Methods in microfluidics: computation, experimentation. Microfluidic components: microchannels, micromixers, micropumps, microvalves, microsesors. Overview of microfluidic applications: lab-on-chip devices, microstructured fuel cells. A project is required.
ENGR 6231 Microfluidic Devices for Synthetic Biology (*) (4 credits)
Topics include introduction to microfluidic components (pumps, valves, automation), programming microfluidics, fabrication techniques, microfluidic paradigms, and applications for chemical and biological analysis; introduction to synthetic biology, biological parts and their properties, network structure and pathway engineering, synthetic networks, manipulating DNA and measuring responses, basic behaviour of genetic circuits, building complex genetic networks; integration of mircofluidics and synthetic biology; economic implications. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken ENGR 691 (Microfluidic Devices for Synthetic Biology) may not take this course for credit.
ENGR 6241 Hydrodynamics (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6201.
Fundamental concepts of ideal flow; irrotational flow patterns; kinematics of flow; potential theory; standard flow patterns; conformal transformation; Cauchy-Riemann condition; complex operator; simple engineering applications. A project is required.
ENGR 6251 The Finite Difference Method in Computational Fluid Dynamics (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6201.
Classification of second order partial differential equations, boundary conditions. Finite difference discretization of equations, truncation error, explicit and implicit formulations. Numerical stability, consistency and convergence. Time dependent (parabolic) equations, explicit and implicit discretization, stability, convergence. Steady state (elliptic) equations, explicit and implicit discretization, iterative and direct solution methods. Hyperbolic equations. Formulation of flow problems and applications to incompressible, compressible and transonic inviscid and viscous flows are interspersed throughout the course. Project on specific topic or applications.
ENGR 6261 The Finite Element Method in Computational Fluid Dynamics (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6201.
Classification of second order partial differential equations, boundary conditions. The finite element method, simple examples, assembly rules, solution of linear systems of equations. Forming the modules of a general FEM computer code. The variational approach, variational principles and stationary functions. Elements and interpolation functions. The weighted residual approach Rayleigh-Ritz, least squares, subdomain and collocation, weak Galerkin formulation. Formulation of flow problems and applications to incompressible, compressible and transonic inviscid and viscous flows are interspersed throughout the course. Project on specific topic or applications.
ENGR 6281 Modelling Turbulent Flows (4 credits)
Computational methods in fluid mechanics, the Reynolds-averaged equations, scales of turbulence, two-point correlation tensors, algebraic models, one equation and two equation models, Boussinesq approximation, nonlinear constitutive relations, types of turbulent flows, multiple time scales and stiff differential equations, solution convergence and grid sensitivity, brief introduction to advanced models. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for ENGR 691C (Modelling Turbulent Flows) may not take this course for credit.
ENGR 6291 Rheology (4 credits)
Viscoelasticity, standard flows and material functions, relationships between material functions, generalized Newtonian fluid, the Maxwell model, finite linear viscoelasticity, continuum constitutive equations, effects of material, temperature and pressure on viscoelasticity behaviour, rheometry issues in viscoelastic flow simulations, industrial applications of rheology. A project is required.
Note: Basic understanding of fluid mechanics is required.
ENGR 6301 Advanced Dynamics (4 credits)
Dynamics of rigid bodies; generalized coordinates; D’Alembert’s principle; Lagrange’s equations; energy methods, Hamilton’s theory; Euler-Lagrange equations; variational principle of mechanics. Phase space canonical transformation. Language multipliers methods. Hamilton-Jacobe equation. Project on specific topic or applications.
ENGR 6311 Vibrations in Machines and Structures (*) (4 credits)
Vibrations of discrete systems: Single-Degree of Freedom (SDOF) and Multi-Degree of Freedom (MDOF) systems; continuous systems: bars, beams, membranes and plates with various boundary conditions; mode superposition; energy methods; Rayleigh-Ritz Method; condensation techniques; applications to machine components, rotor bearing systems, vehicle and aerospace structures. Project on selected topics is an integral part of the course.
ENGR 6371 Micromechatronic Systems and Applications (*) (4 credits)
Introduction to microsystems and devices; mechanical properties of materials used in microsystems; microfabrication and post-processing techniques; sacrificial and structural layers; lithography, deposition and etching; introduction and design of different types of sensors and actuators; micromotors and other microdevices; mechanical design, finite element modelling; design and fabrication of free-standing structures; microbearings; special techniques: double sided lithography, electrochemical milling, laser machining, LIGA, influence of IC fabrication methods on mechanical properties; application examples in biomedical, industrial and space technology areas; integration, bonding and packaging of MEMS devices. This course includes a project.
ENGR 6411 Robotic Manipulators I: Mechanics (*) (4 credits)
Types of industrial robots and their applications. Mathematical analysis for robot manipulation: homogeneous transformations; definition and solution of kinematic equations governing the position and orientation of the hand. Force analysis and static accuracy; forces and moments of inertia, dynamic equation of equilibrium, differential equations of motion of robotic arms. Robotic actuators. Project on specific topic or applications.
ENGR 6412 Autonomy for Mobile Robots (*) (4 credits)
Topics include application of autonomous wheeled robots: autonomous cars, indoor robots, (off-road) unmanned ground vehicles; robot motion models, robot odometry; robot sensor models: beam models of range finders, feature-based measurement models; occupancy grid mapping; the Bayes Filter; the Kalman filter; the particle filter; robot localization: particle filter localization, Kalman filter localization; introduction to simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM). A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for ELEC 691 MM (Autonomy for Mobile Robots) may not take this course for credit.
ENGR 6421 Standards, Regulations and Certification (4 credits)
Overview of DoT and other international (FAA, etc.) aviation standards, regulations and certification procedures; regulatory areas, namely, pilot training/testing, air traffic procedures, aircraft systems design and airworthiness; development process for new regulations and criteria for certification. Projects on selected topics.
ENGR 6441 Materials Engineering for Aerospace (4 credits)
Fundamentals of materials engineering and processing with special emphasis on aerospace engineering materials and protection against failure; microstructures, phase equilibria for aerospace materials, dislocations, deformation, strain hardening and annealing, recovery, recrystallization; hot and cold metal forming (aircraft fabrication), solidification, castings (process and defects); welding and non-destructive testing, solid solution and dispersion strengthening; ferrous alloys and super alloys, light alloys (AL, MG, TI), ceramic materials, polymers, composite materials (polymer matrix/metal matrix); corrosion, fatigue and creep failure; fracture and wear. Projects on selected topics.
ENGR 6461 Avionic Navigation Systems (4 credits)
Introduction: history of air navigation; earth coordinate and mapping systems; international navigation standards; airspace and air traffic control structure; basics of flight instruments and flight controls; fundamental concepts of navigation. Classification of modern avionic navigation systems. Basics of air traffic communication: radio wave propagation; VHF and HF systems. Short range, long range, approach/terminal area avionic navigation systems and radar systems: principles; design; advantages/disadvantages; errors; impact of global positioning system and future trends. Introduction to advanced integrated avionic systems. Projects on selected topics.
ENGR 6471 Integration of Avionics Systems (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6461.
Introduction to the basic principles of integration of avionics systems; review of Earth’s geometry and Newton’s laws; inertial navigation sensors and systems (INS); errors and uncertainty in navigation; global positioning system (GPS); differential and carrier tracking GPS applications; terrestrial radio navigation systems; Kalman filtering; integration of navigation systems using Kalman filtering; emphasis on integration of GPS and INS using Kalman filtering. A project is required.
ENGR 6501 Applied Elasticity (4 credits)
Plane stress and strain; analysis of stress and strain in three dimensions; Airy’s stress function; solution of two-dimensional problems by polynomials and Fourier series; effect of small holes in bars and plates; torsion and bending of prismatic bars; Membrane analogy; thermoelasticity; rectangular, circular, ring-shaped flat plates; applications in civil and mechanical engineering. A case study or a project is required.
ENGR 6151 Continuum Mechanics (4 credits)
This course presents the macroscopic mechanical behaviour of continuously distributed solid and fluid materials. This is a fundamental graduate course in the field of mechanical or aerospace engineering, which  covers basic principles of continuum mechanics and their engineering applications. All laws of continuum mechanics are formulated in terms of quantities that are independent of coordinates. Thus, in this course, first the concept of tensors is presented in detail as the linear transformation. This is followed by the formulation of the kinematics of very small and large deformation and the description of stresses and the basic laws of continuum mechanics common to all materials. Finally, constitutive equations governing the behaviours of idealized materials, including the elastic, hyperelastic and viscous materials, are presented as applications of these laws. A project is required.
ENGR 6511 Fundamentals of Finite Element Analysis of Structures (*) (4 credits)
Topics include matrix formulation of the force and of the displacement methods of analysis; direct stiffness approach, finite element methods for structural analysis; truss, beam, plane strain, plane stress, shell and solid elements; computer applications. A project is required.
ENGR 6531 The Finite Element Method in Structural Mechanics (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6511.
Displacement analysis of structures; finite elements of a continuum; applications of the method to stress analysis of two-and three-dimensional structures; stability problems; vibrations and heat transfer; digital computer applications. A project is required.
ENGR 6541 Structural Dynamics (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6511.
Dynamic behaviour of structures; lumping of masses; motion of elastic framed structures caused by arbitrary disturbances; analytical and numerical methods of solution; approximate determinations of natural frequencies in elastic systems; dynamic response of framed structures in the inelastic range; continuous systems, introduction to approximate design methods. A case study or a project is required.
ENGR 6551 Theory of Elastic and Inelastic Stability (4 credits)
Analysis of elastic and inelastic stability of columns; frame buckling; beam-columns, strength of plates, shear webs and shells; torsiona; flexural buckling of thin-walled, open sections; snap-through; critical discussion of current design specifications; applications to structures. A case study or a project is required.
ENGR 6561 Theory of Plates and Shells (4 credits)
Analysis of deformation and stress in plates and flat slabs under transverse loads; various boundary conditions; numerical methods; membrane stresses and displacements in shells under various loading; bending theory of shells; limit analysis of rotationally symmetric plates and shells; applications to shell type structures such as folded plate structures; sandwich plates; shell roofs and pressure vessels. A case study or a project is required.
ENGR 6571 Energy Methods in Structural Mechanics (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6511.
Principles of virtual work, total potential and complementary energy. Reisner’s Principle. Introduction to calculus of variations. Ritz and Galerkin’s methods. Applications to frame, plate and shell structures. A project is required.
ENGR 6581 Introduction to Structural Dynamics (*) (4 credits)
Theory of vibrations. Dynamic response of simple structural systems. Effects of blast, wind, traffic and machinery vibrations. Basic concepts in earthquake resistant design. Computer applications. A case study or a project is required.
ENGR 6601 Principles of Solar Engineering (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 6541.
Magnitude and availability of the solar energy input, including seasonal and diurnal variations of direct beam radiation; spectral distribution of sunlight; scattering and absorption processes; diffuse radiation; influence of cloud cover. Magnitude and time variation of typical loads, including space heating and cooling water heating; dehumidification. Principles of passive and active methods of solar collection, thermal conversion, and energy storage. Analysis of systems and components, including treatment of thermal and turbulent losses; efficiency calculations; electrical analogies; impedance matching and system optimization. Economics of systems. A case study or a project is required.
ENGR 6611 Equipment Design for Solar Energy Conversion (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6201.
This course emphasizes the mechanical design of solar heating and cooling systems and consists of the following topics: thermodynamic analysis of radiation, collection and conversion of solar energy, selection and manufacturing of components such as collectors, piping, line insulation, heat exchangers, etc., solar cooling and dehumidification, control of solar energy systems, case studies and project experiences. A case study or a project is required.
ENGR 6661 Solar Energy Materials Science (4 credits)
The place of organisms and materials in the solar energy cycle; physical, chemical and optical phenomena. Selective absorbers: surfaces and films, emissivity, thermal conversion, role of crystal defects and phase interfaces in metals and semiconductors. Reflector characteristics and damage modes. Optical and mechanical properties of glass, polymer and composite windows. Photovoltaic: physics and materials. Chemical, thermal and photo stability. Thermal transfer and storage media: gaseous, aqueous, organic; phase change and particulate systems; stability and corrosive effects. A case study or a project is required.
ENGR 6811 Energy Resources: Conventional and Renewable (4 credits) Depletion of conventional energy sources. Emission of greenhouse gases from conventional power production systems. Principles of renewable energy systems; cogeneration of electrical and thermal energy, photovoltaic systems, wind power, fuel cells, hybrid systems. Hydrogen and other forms of energy storage for renewable power production. Integrated and small-scale renewable energy systems; independent versus grid-connected systems. A case study or a project is required.
ENGR 691 Topics in Engineering I (4 credits)
See Note in Topic Area E02
ENGR 692 Case Study and Report (1 credit)
Students complete a case study and submit a report on a topic related to the students’ discipline, supervised by a professor, and approved by the Graduate Program Director in students' home department. The case study and report must present a current engineering problem or practice related to the students' research interest.
Note: This course cannot be taken by students enrolled in the SOEN program.
ENGR 6951 Seminar on Space Studies (4 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of Instructor.
Introduction to the science and technology of spaceflight; remote sensing; human factors in space; automation and robotics; space law; space transportation systems; the space station; the Moon-Mars initiative; space utilization; interplanetary travel. Project on selected topic.
ENGR 6971 Project and Report I (4 credits)
See Requirements for the Degree in Engineering Programs section. Project: 8 hours per week.
ENGR 6981 Project and Report II (4 credits)
See Requirements for the Degree in Engineering Programs section. Project: 8 hours per week.
ENGR 6991 Project and Report III (5 credits)
See Requirements for the Degree in Engineering Programs section. Project: 10 hours per week.
ENGR 7011 Graduate Seminar in Mechanical and Industrial Engineering (1 credit)
Seminar: 2 hours per week.
ENGR 7121 Analysis and Design of Linear Multivariable Systems (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6131.
Representation of linear multivariable systems. Controllability, observability and canonical forms; poles and zeroes; multivariable system inverses; the linear quadratic regulator problem; the robust servomechanism problem; the minimal design problem; frequency-domain design techniques. Project: 2 hours per week.
ENGR 7131 Adaptive Control (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC, 6061, ENGR 6131.
Real-time parameter estimation; least-squares and regression models; recursive estimators; model reference adaptive systems (MRAS); MRAS based on gradient approach and stability theory; self-tuning regulators (STR); adaptive prediction and control; stability and convergence results, robustness issues; auto-tuning and gain scheduling; alternatives to adaptive control; practical aspects; implementation and applications. Project: 2 hours per week.
ENGR 7181 Digital Control of Dynamic Systems (4 credits)
Prerequisites: ELEC 6061, ENGR 6131.
Review of discrete-time and sampled-data systems; discrete input-output and state-space equivalents; controllability and observability of sampled-data systems; controller design using transform techniques, design using state-space methods; generalized sample-data hold functions; optimal control; quantization effects; multi-rate sampling; robust control; discrete-time non-linear systems; discrete-time multivariable systems. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for ENGR 6181 may not take this course for credit.
ENGR 7201 Micro-Gravity Fluid Dynamics (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6201.
Forces and accelerations in space environment; zero-gravity simulation, free falling capsules, flights in Keplerian trajectories, sounding rockets, and the space station; surface tension; main non-dimensional parameters; Laplace-Young equation; contact angle; Dupre’s equation; Neumann’s triangle; minimization principle associated with Laplace’s equation; equilibrium shapes of a liquid, small oscillations of ideal and viscous fluids, liquid handling problems at low gravity, liquid positioning and control, vortexing capillary; numerical simulations of liquid dynamics in microgravity environment. Projects on selected topics.
ENGR 7331 Random Vibrations (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6311.
Mathematical descriptions of stochastic processes; spectral density and correlation functions; Gaussian and non-Gaussian random processes; Markov processes and Fokker/Planck equation; response of linear and nonlinear oscillatory systems to random excitation; non-stationary and narrow-band random processes. Project on selected research topic or applications.
ENGR 7401 Robotic Manipulators II: Control (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6411.
Control of a single link manipulator; position, velocity and acceleration errors; control of a multiple link manipulator sensor: vision, proximity, touch, slip, force, compliance and force controlled robots. Computer control of robots, command languages. Introduction to intelligent robots. Project on selected topics of current interest.
ENGR 7461 Avionic Systems Design (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6461.
Definitions, purpose, history and evolution of avionic systems; cockpit displays configurations, classifications, and design considerations; ARINC communication bus system standards; air data computer system; navigation systems; automatic flight control systems; monitoring/warning/alert systems; flight management systems; system integration; advanced concepts and future trends. Projects on selected topics.
ENGR 7501 Advanced Finite Element Method in Structural Mechanics (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6511 or equivalent.
Topics include finite elements of a continuum; applications of the method to stress analysis of two- and three-dimensional structures; stability problems; vibrations and heat transfer; non-linear methods; computer applications. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken ENGR 6531 may not take this course for credit.
ENGR 7521 Advanced Matrix Analysis of Structures (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6511.
Displacement method for two- and three-dimensional analysis of structures. Nonlinear large displacement analysis by stiffness method. Matrix formulations of vibration and stability problems. Computer applications. A project is required.
ENGR 7531 Boundary Element Method in Applied Mechanics (4 credits)
Boundary integral formulations of Axi-Symmetric, two- and three-dimensional potential and elastostatic problems. Treatment of thermal effects, singularity elements, infinite boundary elements. Coupling of boundary elements and finite elements. Introduction to non-linear, elastostatic problems. Numerical implementation. A case study or a project is required.
ENGR 791 Topics in Engineering II
See Note in Topic Area E02
ENGR 7961 Industrial “Stage” and Training (6 credits)
Prerequisite: Completion of at least twelve credits in the composite option and at least twenty-one credits in the aerospace program or permission of program director.
This is an integral component of the aerospace program and the composites option in the Mechanical Engineering program that is to be completed under the supervision of an experienced engineer in the facilities of a participating company (Canadian work permit is required). The topic is to be decided by a mutual agreement between the student, the participating company and the program director. The course is graded on the basis of the student’s performance during the work period, which includes a technical report.
ENGR 8901 Master of Applied Science Research and Thesis (29 credits)
See Requirements for the Degree in Engineering Programs section.
ENGR 8911 Doctoral Research and Thesis (70 credits)
See Requirements for the Degree in Engineering Programs section.
Information Systems Engineering
INSE 6100 Advanced Java Platforms (4 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the CIISE is required.
This course emphasizes the architecture and the inner workings of the Java virtual machine; 3 distributions of the Java Platform: the micro-addition, the standard addition and the enterprise addition; the JCP process and the Java standards purposed as API extensions; semantic foundations of Java: static semantics and dynamic semantics. Introduction of technologies that are used to accelerate (performance analysis, hardware accelerators, ahead-of-time, just-in-time, selected dynamic compilation and component-based acceleration) and secure (virtual machines, such as vulnerability analysis, Java security models, byte-code verification, access controllers, security managers, policy files, and certified compilation) Java. Semantic correctness of acceleration and security techniques will also be addressed. A project is required.
INSE 6110 Foundations of Cryptography (4 credits)
Introduction to cryptography and cryptanalysis, classical ciphers, number-theoretic reference problems, the integer factorization problem, the RSA problem, the quadratic residuosity problem, computing square roots in Zn, the discrete logarithmic problem, the diffie-hellman problem, pseudorandom bits and sequences, stream ciphers: feedback shift registers, LFSRs, RC4. Block Ciphers: SPN and Fiestel structures, DES, AES, linear cryptanalysis, differential cryptanalysis, side channel attacks, ciphertext indistinguishability, attack analysis, IND-CPA, IND-CCA, IND-CCA2, public key encryption: RSA, Rabin, ElGamal, elliptic curves cryptography, hash functions: Un-keyed hash functions, MACs, Attacks, Digital signatures: RSA, Fiat-Shamir, DSA, public key infrastructure, key management, efficient implementation of ciphers, zero-knowledge proof. A project is required.
INSE 6120 Crypto-Protocol and Network Security (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INSE 6110 or equivalent.
Cryptographic protocols, authentication protocols, key distributions protocols, e-commerce protocols, fair-exchange and contract-signing protocols, security protocol properties: authentication, secrecy, integrity, availability, non-repudiation, atomicity, certified delivery, crypto-protocol attacks, design principles for security protocols, automatic analysis, public key infrastructure, models and architectures for network security, authentication using Kerberos and X.509, email security (PGP, S/MIME), IP security, SSL/TLS protocols, virtual private networks, firewalls intrusion detection, host-based IDS, network based IDS, misuse detection methods, anomaly detection methods, intrusion detection in distributed systems, intrusion detection in wireless ad hoc networks botnet detection, analysis and mitigation, darknet traffic analysis, prediction and forecast of network threats, network security monitoring. A project is required.
INSE 6130 Operating Systems Security (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INSE 6110 or equivalent.
System security, Windows security, Linux security, Unix security, access control matrix, HRU result, OS security mechanisms, security administration, access control list, capability list, role-based access control, security policy, mandatory and discretionary access control, multi-level security, BLP policy, Biba model, conflict of interest, Chinese Wall policy, secure booting, authentication, password security, challenge response, auditing and logging, system kernel security, threat analysis, security attacks, security hardened operating, host-based intrusion detection, securing network services, firewalls and border security, registry security, embedded and real-time OS security, information flow control. A project is required.
INSE 6140 Malware Defenses and Application Security (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INSE 6110 or equivalent.
Malicious code, taxonomy, viruses, worms, trojan horses, logical and temporal bombs, infection process, security properties of applications, safety, high level security, detection approaches, ad hoc techniques: scanning, anti-virus technology, obfuscation, dynamic analysis for security: passive and active monitoring, in-line and reference monitors, sandboxing, static analysis for security: data and control flow analysis for security, type-based analysis for security, anti-reverse-engineering protection, software fingerprinting, self-certified code: certifying compilers, proof carrying code, efficient code certification, typed assembly languages, certificate generation, certificate verification and validation, C and C++ security, java security, byte-code verification, access controllers, security managers, permission files, security APIs, critical APIs, protection domains, security profiles, mobile code security. A project is required.
INSE 6150 Security Evaluation Methodologies (4 credits)
Security evaluation of information systems, security evaluation of software, security evaluation of products. Security code inspection, security testing, security standards, preparation of a security evaluation: impact scale, likelihood scale, severity scale. Vulnerability analysis, risk analysis, security plan elaboration. ITSEC, MARION, and MEHARI methods, OCTAVE, common criteria, target of evaluation, protection profile, security functional requirement, security factors, errors, accidents, assurance requirements, assurance levels, evaluation process, compliance with the protection profile, IT security ethics, privacy, digital copyright, licensing IT security products, computer fraud and abuse, incident handling, business records, security forensics, security evaluation case studies. Information security governance: risk management, business strategy, standards, COBIT. Situation awareness. A project is required.
INSE 6160 Database Security and Privacy (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INSE 6110 or equivalent.
Access control in relational databases; grant/revoke model; security by views; query modification; Oracle VPD; auditing in databases; information warfare in databases; multi-level database security; polyinstantiation and covert channel; statistical database security; inference control; security by auditing; microdata security; random perturbation; outsourced database security, encrypted databases; SQL injection attack; anomaly detection in databases; data privacy, P3P; Hippocratic databases; perfect secrecy-based privacy; k-anonymity model; l-diversity; data utility measure, data release with public algorithms, multi-party privacy preserving computation; privacy in OLAP. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for INSE 691A (Database Security and Privacy) may not take this course for credit.
INSE 6170 Network Security Architecture and Management (4 credits)
Security architecture and management, risk and threats, security attributes and properties, security design principles, security standards, security defence toolkit, and security building blocks, corporate VoIP, residential IPTV, IMS, cloud services, security functions and their implementation, operational considerations of deployment and management of security, configuration, vulnerability management and updates, incident management, emerging challenges and innovative solutions. A project is required.
INSE 6180 Security and Privacy Implications of Data Mining (4 credits)
Introduction to data mining and its applications; privacy legislations security and privacy threats caused by current data mining techniques; risks and challenges in emerging data mining applications; attacks and prevention methods: web privacy attacks, data mining-based intrusion detection; privacy-preserving data mining; privacy-preserving data publishing. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for INSE 691D (Security Implications of Data Mining) may not take this course for credit.
INSE 6190 Wireless Network Security (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INSE 6110 or equivalent.
Introduction to wireless network security; security issues in cellular networks; authentication/key management in wireless LAN; secure handover; security in mobile IP; security issues in mobile ad-hoc networks: trust establishment, secure routing, anonymity; anonymous sensory data collection; privacy for smartphone applications. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for INSE 691B (Wireless Security) may not take this course for credit.
INSE 6210 Total Quality Methodologies in Engineering (4 credits)
Methodologies for quality engineering: six sigma, ACE (Achieving Competitive Excellence), Lean engineering, ISO9000 series; comparative study, quality clinic process charts, relentless root cause analysis, mistake proofing, market feedback analysis, process improvement and waste elimination, visual control, standard work and process management, process certification, setup reduction, total productive maintenance, DMAIC and DMADV processes, define phase, project charter, project scoping and planning, measure phase, critical to quality requirements, quality functional deployment, analyze phase, functional and process requirements, design requirements, design concepts, high-level design capability elaboration and evaluation, design phase, detailed design capability elaboration and evaluation, failure mode and effects analysis, control and verification plans, verify phase, pilot-scale processes, pilot testing and evaluation, implementation planning, full-scale processes, start-up and testing, performance evaluation, turnover to operations and maintenance, transition to process management, project closure. A project is required.
INSE 6220 Advanced Statistical Approaches to Quality (4 credits)
Introduction to quality control and total quality, statistical concepts and techniques in quality control, graphical methods for data presentation and quality improvement, statistical basis for control charts, pattern analysis in control charts, control charts for variables, control charts for individual measurements, control charts for attributes, process capability analysis, CUSUM charts and EWMA charts, acceptance sampling by attributes, acceptance plans by variables, reliability models, reliability and life testing plans, multivariate quality control, multivariate methods, aspects of multivariate analysis, multivariate normal distribution, multivariate tests of hypotheses, multivariate analysis of variance, principal components analysis, factor analysis, discrimination and classification, multivariate quality control, multivariate linear regression, design of experiments (DOE), Taguchi method, completely randomized design (CRD), randomized complete block design (RCBD), incomplete block designs, latin square designs, graeco-latin square designs, factorial designs, fractional factorial designs, split plot designs, and nested designs (compared to cross-over designs), quality in the service sector, service industries and their characteristics, model for service quality and applications. A project is required.
INSE 6230 Total Quality Project Management (4 credits)
Role of a project manager, learning and applications, project management processes, project management in quality initiatives, intellectual property protection, customer project management and critical-to-quality requirements, project planning and execution, team formation, goals, roles, procedures and interpersonal relationship, types of teams, creating a project plan, project tracking, project compliance requirements, sourcing and supplier qualification, government contract data rights, government property, risk management process, action planning, project communication, customer, team and stakeholder communications, communication planning and strategy, web-based collaboration, project management software tools. A project is required.
INSE 6240 Executive Communication (1 credit)
Communication plan elaboration, preparing presentations, developing a sound strategy, organizing for effectiveness, capturing the audience, the impromptu speech, introducing a speaker, reading a paper, leading a conference, interpersonal communication, use of voice, active listening, assertive speaking, giving and receiving feedback, assertive techniques, work styles, conflict and dispute resolution, negotiation, managing difficult situations, writing skills, interpersonal communications, business letters, formal reports, communication technology. A project is required.
INSE 6250 Quality Methodologies for Software (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INSE 6210 or equivalent, COMP 5541 or equivalent.
Quality methodologies for software, calculating sigma values, graphical analysis, quality processes for software, MAIC, DMADV, define overview, project context, initial analysis and design, lifecycle and multi-generational planning, project management, risk analysis, measure overview, customer needs, quality functional deployment for software, software metrics and requirements, scorecards, meta-models, specification languages (SDL, B, Z, etc.), software modelling (UML, Core, IDEF, etc.), graphical languages, design and verify overview, failure mode and effect analysis for software, defensive programming, smart and simple design, peer reviews, performance analysis, statistical tools, software testing, software verification. A project is required.
INSE 6260 Software Quality Assurance (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INSE 6210 or equivalent, COMP 5541 or equivalent.
Quality assurance, quality factors, components of a software quality assurance system, contract review, software development and quality plans, activities and alternatives, integration of quality activities in a project lifecycle, reviews, software inspection, software verification, testing processes, static analysis, control-flow analysis, data-flow analysis, control-flow testing, loop testing, data-flow testing, transaction-flow testing, domain testing, type-based analysis, dynamic analysis, usage models, operational profiles, result and defect analysis, reliability, performance analysis, maintenance and reverse engineering, case tools and software quality assurance. A project is required.
INSE 6270 Quality-Based Systems Engineering (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INSE 6210 or equivalent.
System engineering, quality-based system development process, acquisition and specification of system requirements, system design and prototyping, system implementation and testing, modelling languages for system engineering (SysML, IDEF, CORE, etc.), exchange mechanisms for system engineering data (AP233, XMI, etc.) gathering, specification, formulation, and refinement of system requirements, customer requirements, market requirements, technical requirements, implementation requirements, eco-requirements (scenario-based requirements gathering and refinement, affinity diagram, analytic hierarchy analysis), conflict resolution (TRIZ), management of system requirements in the design process (axiomatic design, decision tree, morphology matrix, systematic design), management of system requirements in the implementation process (six-sigma, ACE, Lean, ISO 9000, ERP, SAP, CMMS), case studies. A project is required.
INSE 6280 Quality Assurance for Systems Engineering (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INSE 6210 or equivalent, previously or concurrently.
Introduction to quality assurance and quality factors in systems engineering, components of a quality assurance system, principles of verification, validation and accreditation of systems, Vvsystem modelling languages, model semantics, techniques for V principles of system simulation (types of problems, simulation systems and their classification, principles of simulation system design and implementation), verification and validation techniques for simulation models (problem entity, conceptual model, and computerized model), development of simulation platforms, standards for system simulation, high level architecture (HLA). A project is required.
INSE 6290 Quality in Supply Chain Design (4 credits)
Evolution of supply chain, lingo, notation, master planning, role in business, performance analysis, activity profiling, strategic quality planning for supply chain, inventory planning and management (IP&M), perfect order percentage, inventory turns, fill rates and substitutions, purchase and customer order cycle times, customer service and order processing (CS&OP), network planning, supply contracts, distribution strategies, coordinated product and supply chain design, quality and innovation in product design, design for maintainability, designing for reliability, environmental considerations in supply chain design, designing quality services, make, buy, and sourcing analysis, supplier partnerships, global sourcing active assembly, supply chain management systems, efficient transportation, efficient warehousing, impact of e-commerce on supply chains, information technology and decision support systems, e-business strategies, e-business transactions, e-commerce platforms for supply chain. A project is required.
INSE 6300 Quality Assurance in Supply Chain Management (4 credits)
Supply chain management, definition, models, evolution and evaluation, quality attributes, evaluation criteria, key supply chain management issues, supply chain cost reduction opportunities, sales and operating planning hierarchy, gathering data required for sales and operation planning, inventory management techniques, effective supply chain management, supply and demand synchronization, aligning customer demands to order fulfillment, management of supply chain constraints, supply chain performance measurements, supply chain Information, communication, security, information flows, security measures, global supply chain quality and international quality standards, customer driven quality, managing supplier quality in the supply chain, the tools of quality; statistically based quality improvement for variables and attributes; managing quality improvement teams and projects. A project is required.
INSE 6310 Systems Engineering Maintenance Management (4 credits)
Maintenance concepts in engineering systems; component replacement; optimal component preventive replacement intervals; age-based replacement models for components; spare parts provision; optimal inspection decisions; condition based maintenance systems; proportional hazards model; capital equipment replacement; maintenance resource planning; reliability centered maintenance; equipment degradation analysis; degradation prediction; maintenance information system; maintenance software. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for INSE 691C (Systems Engineering Maintenance Management) may not take this course for credit.
INSE 6311 Sustainable Infrastructure Planning and Management Systems (4 credits)
This multi-disciplinary course will provide the basic knowledge for developing advanced information systems that can be used to systematically plan and manage infrastructure (e.g. roads and bridges) throughout its lifecycle, including environmental impact assessment. The course will cover the following topics: Definition and history of Infrastructure, Types and functions of Infrastructure, Infrastructure Planning, Performance Modelling, Failure Analysis and Reliability Issues, Infrastructure Inspection and Monitoring, Maintenance and Rehabilitation Strategies, Environmental Management and Sustainability Issues, and Integrated Infrastructure Management Systems. Projects.
INSE 6320 Risk Analysis for Information and Systems Engineering (4 credits)
Introduction to risk analysis theory. Risk assessment methodologies, risk assessment techniques and standards for information systems, review of probability theory, hazard identification, fault tree analysis, event tree analysis, sensitivity analysis, qualitative risk analysis, quantitative risk analysis, case studies on information systems, value analysis and integrated risk management. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for INSE 691H (Risk Analysis for Information and Systems Engineering) may not take this course for credit.
INSE 6400 Principles of Systems Engineering (4 credits)
Origins of systems engineering; modern engineering systems; structure of complex systems; systems life cycle; systems engineering management; system decomposition and architecture; systems with uncertain and imperfect information; structural and dynamics modelling; integration and evaluation: production, operation and support; systems engineering decision tools; special topics: systems of systems, sustainability, mass collaboration. A project is required.
INSE 6411 Product Design Theory and Methodology (4 credits)
This course introduces main design theories and methodologies for the conceptual and configuration design of mechanical/manufacturing systems. It includes the following topics: general design process; introduction to design theory and methodologies; user requirements analysis; structure of design problem; design concept and product configuration generation methods; evaluation of design concepts and product configuration; sources and resolution strategies of design conflicts; computer-assistance of all these tasks; and case studies of product design. A project is required.
INSE 6421 Systems Integration and Testing (4 credits)
Introduction to integration and testing of complex systems; fundamentals of project planning; process analysis; workflow modelling; six sigma tools and methodologies for systems integration; formulation of systems operational assessment and concept; systems architecture, functions and capabilities composition and packaging into high-level system architecture; modelling and analysis methods for representing system functionality and capability; interface description and management; testability and interoperability testing; management issues pertaining to integrated product teams, vendors, suppliers, and subcontractors. A project is required.
INSE 6431 Ad Hoc Wireless Networks: Architectures and Protocols (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6851, COMP 6461 or equivalent.
Design, provisioning and management of ad hoc wireless networks. Concepts, architectures and protocols related to the efficient design and high performance of ad hoc wireless networks. Medium access control schemes; mathematical analysis. Analysis of access protocols in multihop networks; derive the system capacity. Study of various control knobs for improving the network capacity; power control, physical carrier sense turning, rate control, interference mitigation, and channel diversity. Study emerging issues such as supporting quality of service in wireless networks; security issues in wireless networks, broadband wireless access; wireless mesh networks; their integration with wired networks; vehicular ad hoc networks and related protocols. A project is required.
INSE 6441 Applied Game Theory and Mechanism Design (4 credits)
Fundamentals of game theory; equilibrium concepts; strategic games; extensive games; Bayesian games; game strategies in network security; game theory for trust and reputation; fundamentals of mechanism design; optimal mechanisms; efficient mechanisms; incentive compatibility; incentives and information security; revelation principle and trust; analysis tools; applications: security protocols, supply chain, trust and reputation, social networks. A project is required.
INSE 6510 Video Game Technology and Development (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COMP 5511 or equivalent, previously or concurrently.
This course is part development and part technology, and will cover the process of commercial video game development, and software design patterns used for game design. The course provides an in-depth understanding of how the game design process works. Students work with a game engine software framework to design and implement several kinds of games. Video game history. Basic Building blocks of a game. Elements of game design. Game Maker: objects, sprites, events. Space Shooter. Developing games with Games Factory. Real Time Strategy game development. A project is required.
INSE 6530 3D Graphics and Computer Animation for Game Design (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COMP 6761 or equivalent, previously or concurrently.
Application of 3D graphics and animation topics to non real-time rendered media. Current research topics in computer animation such as dynamic simulation of flexible and rigid objects, automatically-generated control systems, and evolution of behaviours. History of Animation. Animation Basics. Keyframe Animation. Path Animation. Non-Linear Animation. Modelling Concerns for Animation. Rigging for Forward and Inverse Kinematics. Morphing. Expressions. Particle Systems. Dynamics. A project is required.
INSE 6610 Cybercrime Investigations (4 credits)
Introduction to cybercrimes: unauthorized access, mischief to data, possession of hacking tools, possession of child pornography; Legal aspects: Canadian judicial system, computer crime laws, charter of rights, common law, mutual legal assistance treaty, search warrants, production and assistance orders, international laws, upcoming legal changes; Investigation process: search planning, acquisition methods, environment recognition, evidence identification; Reporting process: investigation and analysis reports, notes taking; authority of seizure; forensic interviews; Computer crime trials: witness preparation, court sentencing, rebuttal witness, cross-examination, testimony, credibility attacks; in-depth case studies. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for INSE 691E (Cybercrime Investigations) may not take this course for credit.
INSE 6620 Cloud Computing Security and Privacy (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INSE 6110 or equivalent.
Cloud computing concepts, SOA and cloud, virtualization and cloud, cloud service delivery models, cloud storage models, cloud deployment scenarios, public/ private/ hybrid/ community cloud, cloud computing architectures, SaaS, PaaS, IaaS, agility, scalability and elasticity of cloud, cloud security, cloud privacy, homomorphic encryption, searching encrypted cloud data, secure data outsourcing, secure computation outsourcing, proof of data possession / retrievability, virtual machine security, trusted computing in clouds, cloud-centric regulatory compliance, business and security risk models, cloud user security, identity management in cloud, SAML, applications of secure cloud computing.
INSE 6630 Recent Developments in Information Systems Security (4 credits)
Prerequisites: Any two of INSE 6110, INSE 6120, INSE 6130, or INSE 6140.
Security and privacy legislations. New security threats and solution on personal computers, enterprise computers, personal information, confidential information, identity fraud, financial fraud, and social networking. Recent developments in trusted computing for critical cyber infrastructure, privacy-aware information sharing, cybercrime, and cyber forensics techniques. Cyber espionage, cyber terrorism, and cyber war. A project is required.
INSE 6640 Smart Grids and Control System Security (4 credits)
Overview of electric grid operation, evolution to the smart grid, smart grid components, dynamic pricing, promotion of “green” resources, governmental regulation, network standards, consumer privacy, risks to the smart grid, physical security and protections against tampering for smart grid environments, device level security, authorization and access control, consumer privacy protection, cryptographic mechanisms for smart grid environments, secure key management, communication security in smart grid, privacy of user data for Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI), security standards for smart grid, supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA), SCADA architecture, SCADA Security, SCADA monitoring, SCADA systems for smart grids, distributed control systems (DCS), communication infrastructure. A project is required.
INSE 6650 Trusted Computing (4 credits)
Hardware and software root of trust; establishing and attesting trust of software systems; Trusted Platform Module (TPM); CPU support for trusted computing, including existing technologies such as Intel Trusted Execution Technology (TXT), AMD Secure Virtual Machine (SVM), ARM TrustZone; secure crypto processors such as Hardware Security Modules (HSMs); bank HSM APIs and their weaknesses; attestation protocols; OS support for trusted computing; security tokens (e.g., second factor of authentication, smartcards, transaction verification code); trusted user interface; use cases: digital rights management (DRM), authentication, protected execution of security sensitive code, trusted kiosk computing, full disk encryption, malware exploiting trusted computing infrastructure; hardware and software attacks; privacy issues. A project is required.
INSE 6660 Secure Programming (4 credits)
Topics include fundamentals of secure programming; string-related vulnerabilities and defence. Pointer-related vulnerabilities and defence; memory management-related vulnerabilities and defence. Integer-related security issues; formatted output-related security issues; concurrency-related security issues; security vulnerabilities and linking; security in sockets programming; security vulnerabilities and signals; file I/O security; best practices and coding standards; design principles for secure programming; model-based secure programming; static analysis for secure programming. A project is required.
INSE 6670 Embedded Systems Security (4 credits)
Topics of this course include embedded and real-time embedded systems; embedded systems security and trust; monitoring of embedded systems; security and protection objectives for hardware; adversaries, attacks; trusted integrated circuits (TIC); hardware assisted security and trust; process reliability and security; secure program execution on embedded processors; networks on chip; secure memory access; hardware trusted platforms; secure processors; efficient security processing; energy efficient security; cryptographic processors; physical one-way functions (POWF); PUF-based security; FSM model of computation; hiding information in FSM/IC piracy protection by active hardware metering; remote enabling and disabling of ICs; watermarking for intellectual property protection (IPP); physical and invasive attacks, side-channel attacks; zero knowledge proofs; FPGA security; FPGA fingerprinting and access; hardware trojan horses. Applications (automotive domain, internet of things, cyber-physical systems, SCADA, sensor networks). A project is required.
INSE 6680 Systems Physical Security (4 credits)
Topics of this course include identifying potential security threats and vulnerabilities, threat and risk assessment; security equipment and systems (access control and biometrics technology, surveillance systems, network infrastructure supporting security technology); physical security of information systems; maximizing the value of security systems; securing transported materials; emergency management and risk mitigation; critical infrastructure protection. Overview of the Canadian Operational Standard on Physical Security, Policy on Government Security and U.S. National Response Framework. A project is required.
INSE 691 Topics in Information Systems Engineering (4 credits)
Note: Subject will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for these courses providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g., INSE 691A, INSE 691B, etc.
INSE 6961 Graduate Seminar in Information and Systems Engineering (1 credit)
Students must attend a set of seminars identified by the Concordia Institute for Information Systems Engineering and submit a comprehensive report on the topics presented in three of the seminars. This course is graded on a pass/fail basis.
INSE 7100 Design and Analysis of Security Protocols (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COEN 6311 or equivalent.
The primary objective of this course is to present the methods used in the design and analysis of modern security protocols, introduction to existing cryptographic protocols. The most important security proprieties (such as authentication, secrecy, integrity, availability, atomicity, certified delivery and other properties), flaw taxonomy (such as freshness attacks, type attacks, parallel session attacks, implementation dependent attacks, binding attacks, encapsulation attacks and other forms of attack). Cryptographic protocol specification (general-purpose formal languages, logical languages, operational languages and security calculi). Cryptographic protocol analysis (security logics analysis, model-based and algebraic analysis, process algebra analysis, type based analysis). Limitations of formal methods and ad-hoc techniques, project will be offered in analyzing a number of published cryptographic protocols. The focus of this course will be on the design and the analysis of security protocols. A project is required.
INSE 7110 Value Added Service Engineering in Next Generation Networks (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6861 or equivalent.
Telecommunications service engineering, or more simply service engineering, is the discipline that addresses the technologies and engineering process for the specification, implementation, testing, deployment, usage of value added services in telecommunication networks, value added services, or more simply services, can be defined as anything that goes beyond two party voice calls. They are either call related (e.g. call diversion, multiparty gaming, conducted conferences) or non-call related (e.g. customized stock quotes, web surfing from a cellular phone). Some services may combine call related and non-call related features (e.g. call centres). This course will cover the basics of service engineering (such as basic concepts, value added services, service life cycle, service engineering, intelligent networks, WAP/Imode/TINE-C). The basics of next generation networks (such as session initiation protocol (SIP), H.323, Megaco, H.248, 3GPP/3GPP2 architecture, softswitch). Signaling protocol-specific approaches (such as H.232 supplementary services, SIP CGI, SIP servlet API). Signaling protocol neutral approaches (such as CPL, JAIN JCC/JCAT, PARLAY; web services). Approaches at the research stage (such as context awareness; mobile code-based approaches). A project is required.
INSE 7120 Advanced Network Management (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6861 or equivalent.
Network management – basics (history and basic definitions, management frameworks, functional areas). The simple network management protocol framework (history, protocol architecture, functional architecture, information architecture, RMON, management by delegation, distributed management and JASMIN NIB, case studies). OSI systems management, TNM and other frameworks (OSI communication, information and functional models, TMN functional, physical and information architecture, case study, CORBA based management, web based management, DTMF, JMX). Interoperability issue and in-depth study of a specific functional area overview of known techniques (e.g. dual MIBs), alarm filtering techniques (e.g. artificial intelligence), alarm correlation techniques (e.g. artificial intelligence, coding theory). Approaches still a research level (mobile agent based network management, active network based network management, policy based artwork management, use of SML/web services). A project is required.
INSE 8901 Master of Applied Science Research and Thesis (25 credits)
Students must complete a 25-credit thesis as part of their degree requirements. The thesis must represent the results of the student’s independent work after admission to the program. The proposed topic for the thesis, together with a brief statement outlining the proposed method of treatment, and the arrangement made for faculty supervision, must be approved by the GCS  Graduate Studies Committee. For purposes of registration, this work will be designated as INSE 8901. The thesis will be evaluated by the student’s supervisor(s), and at least two examiners appointed by the GCS Graduate Studies Committee, one of whom shall be external to the student’s department.
Mechanical, Industrial and Aerospace Engineering
INDU 691 Topics in Industrial Engineering (4 credits)
Note: Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for these courses provided that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. INDU 691A, INDU 691B, etc.
INDU 6111 Theory of Operations Research (4 credits)
This course introduces the fundamentals of convex analysis such as polyhedral sets and the representation theorem. Advanced topics in linear optimization are also covered, such as state-of-the-art solution methods (revised and dual simplex methods, path following interior point methods), duality theory and parametric analysis, Farkas lemma, and KKT optimality conditions. An introduction to other advanced topics (Dantzig-Wolfe decomposition, dynamic programming, and stochastic decision processes) is given. A project is required.
INDU 6121 Applied Optimization (4 credits)
Topics include model building in optimization, model validation, economic interpretation, sensitivity analysis, algorithms and commercial optimization software for problem solving. Mathematical models in deterministic and nondeterministic settings with linear, integer, and nonlinear programming formulations are developed. Applications of optimization models in production, transportation, finance, scheduling, and healthcare systems are presented. A project is required.
INDU 6131 Graph Theory with System Applications (4 credits)
Basic concepts; trees, circuits and cutsets; Eulerian and Hamiltonian graphs; directed graphs; matrices of a graph, graphs and vector spaces; planarity and duality; connectivity, matching and colouring; flows in networks: max-flow min-cut theorem, minimum cost flows; optimization on graphs: minimum-cost spanning trees, optimum branching and shortest paths. Project: two hours per week.
Note: Students who have taken ENGR 6111 may not receive credit for this course.
INDU 6141 Logistics Network Models (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INDU 6121.
This course covers the following wide range of operational issues in the transportation and logistics industry. Different analytical models and their solution strategies are also introduced. Overview of transportation systems including airlines, railways, ocean liners, cargo, energy transportation and pipelines; Supply chain characterization; Site location;Distribution planning; Vehicle routing; Fleet scheduling; Crew scheduling; Demand management; Replenishment management; Revenue management; Geographic information systems; Real-time network control issues. A project is required.
INDU 6151 Decision Models in Service Sector (*) (4 credits)
Introduction to service strategy and operations. Service demand forecasting and development of new services. Service facility location and layout planning. Applications of decision models in service operations and service quality control. Cost analysis, queuing models, risk management and resource allocation models for service decisions. Service outsourcing and supply chain issues. Efficiency and effectiveness issues in different service sectors such as emergency force deployment, municipal resource allocation and health care. Case studies using operations research, operations management, and statistical techniques. A project is required.
INDU 6161 Design and Operations of Supply Chain Networks (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INDU 6121.
This course analyzes various supply chain operation issues from an engineering point of view. The course covers topics such as: supply chain issues and opportunities; performance evaluation of supply chains; supply chain planning and optimization; collaborative decision making in supply chains; transportation planning in supply chains; capacity planning in supply chains; designing global supply chains; risk management in supply chains; sustainable supply chain management. A project is required.
INDU 6211 Production Systems and Inventory Control (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INDU 6121.
This course covers various operational and planning issues in manufacturing industry: Integrated production planning and control. Large scale model development for demand forecasting, materials requirements planning and manufacturing resource planning (MRP/MRPII), production-inventory systems, production planning; models for line balancing, lot sizing, dispatching, scheduling, releasing. Models for inventory control, determination of order quantities and safety stocks, inventory replenishment systems. Supply chain management. Just-in-Time systems, lean and Agile manufacturing. A project is required.
INDU 6221 Lean Enterprise (4 credits)
This course covers topics that are necessary to establish a lean culture at the system level in various organizations:Introduction to principles of the lean enterprise, process management, waste elimination and process variation, five S’s and workplace organization, lean analysis tools and performance measurements, Lean Six Sigma, enterprise value stream mapping, visual workplace, lean product development, lean business administration. A project is required.
INDU 6231 Scheduling Theory (4 credits)
Models for sequencing and scheduling activities including: static and dynamic problems; deterministic and stochastic models. Single machine processing; parallel machine processing; multistage problems including flow-shops and job-shops. Complexity issues. Exact and heuristic solution methods. Average and worst case performance analysis of heuristic methods. Applications in manufacturing environments. Current research trends. Project: two hours per week.
Note: Students who have taken ENCS 6201 may not receive credit for this course.
INDU 6241 Lean Manufacturing (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INDU 6211.
Introduction to the basic principles and concepts of lean manufacturing; tools of lean manufacturing, including value stream mapping, standardized work, setup reduction; mapping the current state; mixed model value streams; mapping the future state; Takt time, finished goods strategy, continuous flow, level pull, pacemaker, pitch, interval; implementing the future state. A project is required.
INDU 6251 Facilities Planning and Warehouse Operations (4 credits)
This course is designed to provide advanced concepts, theory and procedures for the study of facilities location, physical layouts, material flow, and material handling, warehouse operations planning and management systems, warehouse design, automation and control. Analytical procedures are developed to enhance the decision-making process in the design, rationalization and improvement of manufacturing or service facilities. The knowledge learned in this course is integrated with knowledge from related courses to develop a design project. A project is required.
INDU 6310 Applied Probability and Statistics for Engineers (4 credits)
This course introduces probability and statistics concepts frequently used in engineering applications. Probability theory, randomness, conditional probability, joint probability, independence and probability distributions are covered. Data collection, sampling, confidence intervals, hypothesis formulation, errors, estimation topics are given. Linear and  non-linear regression, analysis of residuals and remedial measures, transformation of data, multiple, polynomial and weighted regression, model selection techniques, and joint confidence regions concepts are taught with relevant industry applications. Statistical packages are introduced. A project is required.
Note: This course may not be taken by MASc and PhD students for credit.
INDU 6311 Discrete System Simulation (4 credits)
Probability theory and queuing theory; discrete and continuous variables and their distributions; deterministic and stochastic models; building valid and credible models. Computer simulation of discrete-change systems subject to uncertainty techniques to verify quality of input data; analysis of output data; determination of simulation run-length and number of replications; random number generations, variance reduction techniques, transient and steady state behaviour; comparison of alternative systems. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken ENGR 6491 may not receive credit for this course.
INDU 6321 Introduction to Six Sigma (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INDU 6331.
Overview of the Six Sigma concept; Six Sigma deployment practice; Six Sigma methodologies for process improvement and process (DMAIC) and for product design (DMADV); Integration of Lean techniques in Six Sigma (Lean Six Sigma); Overview of different quality management tools applied in Six Sigma; Application of Designed of Experiments in Six Sigma; Design for Six Sigma through the application of the Robust Parameter Design; Six Sigma project management. A project is required.
INDU 6331 Advanced Quality Control (4 credits)
Introduction to advanced quality control and improvement concepts. Fundamentals of statistical methods and theoretical basis for quality control methods. Advanced and newly developed quality control and improvement methods such as modified and acceptance charts, multiple stream process control, control charts with adaptive sampling and engineering process control for quality. International standards of acceptance sampling. Economic design and implications of quality control and improvement procedures. A project is required.
INDU 6341 Advanced Concepts in Quality Improvement (*) (4 credits) The foundations of modern quality improvement, scientific basis of quality engineering, statistical experimental design issues such as randomized blocks, factorial designs at two levels, fractional factorial designs at two levels, applications on factorial designs, building models, and explanation and critique of Taguchi’s contributions. A project on selected topics is required.
Note: Students who have taken MECH 6461 may not receive credit for this course.
INDU 6351 System Reliability (4 credits)
Review of probability theory; definition of various measures (reliability, availability, MTTF, etc.) and related probability distributions; reliability evaluation of redundant systems (series, parallel, series-parallel, bridge network, etc.); two and three parameter Weibull analysis; failure data analysis; trend analysis; goodness of fit test (Kolmogorov/Smirnov test); introduction of stress-strength modelling; homogeneous Markov models; reliability evaluation of cold, warm, and hot standby systems; introduction to reliability testing; case studies. Knowledge of a first course in probability theory is assumed. Project: two hours per week.
Note: Students who have taken ENGR 6451 may not receive credit for this course.
INDU 6361 Discrete Optimization (4 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the instructor.
Topics include mathematical modelling of industrial and service systems by integer programming (IP); choices in model formulations; optimality, relaxations and bounds; well-solved problems in IP; computational complexity; branch-and-bound methods; polyhedral theory and cutting plane algorithms; Lagrangean duality; software for solving IPs; other optimization techniques. A project is required.
INDU 6371 Stochastic Optimization (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INDU 6111.
Topics include an overview of stochastic optimization models; two-stage and multi-stage stochastic programming; algorithms for solving large-scale stochastic programming models, including sample average approximation (SAA), L-shaped method and scenario decomposition algorithms; robust optimization approach. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for the course INDU 691X (Stochastic Optimization) may not take this course for credit.
INDU 6381 Applications of Reliability Engineering (4 credits)
Topics include an introduction to reliability function; reliability program; failure; requirement allocation and design optimization; painless risk management; design optimization by test; validation; durability; stressstrength; nuisances and no fault found (NFF); operating with failure; fail-safe and operating with failure; real-time health monitoring. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken INDU 691 (Application of Reliability Engineering) may not receive credit for this course.
INDU 6391 Reliability and Maintenance for Design and Manufacturing (4 credits)
Topics include fundamentals of product design and system validation methodologies to establish maintenance programs; design of experiment, test for design validation, pass/fail analysis, reliability growth models, reliability centred maintenance, test for manufacturing; accelerated life and stress tests; failure reporting, analysis and corrective action systems (FRACAS), maintenance programs, lifecycle analysis, end-of-life analysis and industrial approach for reliability; concepts and topics will be covered through real-life case studies. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken INDU 691 (Reliability and Maintenance for Design and Manufacturing) may not receive credit for this course.
INDU 6411 Human Factors Engineering (*) (4 credits)
Elements of anatomy, physiology and psychology; auditory and visual display engineering; engineering anthropometry; human capabilities and limitations; manual material handling: design of work places, human-machine system design; shift work and jet lag; acquisition and retention of skill; toxicity and hazard; human reliability. A project on a current topic is required.
Note: Students who have taken MECH 6251 may not receive credit for this course.
INDU 6421 Systems Safety Engineering and Management (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INDU 6310.
This course covers a variety of topics in safety engineering that provide the necessary knowledge and skills in order for engineers to design and manage systems where life-critical components will perform as expected, even when sub-components fail. Design concepts for safe operation with failure, design for human error and design for availability are introduced. Generic and safety dedicated engineering techniques are taught. Common safety management architectures for service and manufacturing systems, existing safety standards, guidelines in different industries, and their impact on the design processes across the life cycle of a product from initial concept to continuous certification are included. A project is required.
INDU 6521 Quantitative Methods in Healthcare Systems (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INDU 6121.
Topics include mathematical modeling and optimization methods in healthcare problems, healthcare staff planning and scheduling, operating room management, and appointment scheduling in clinics. Other operational issues such as production and delivery of radio-pharmaceuticals, resource allocation and capacity planning in hospitals, ambulance redeployment and dispatching are discussed. Finally, system-level healthcare planning and management tools and methods such as routing and scheduling of caregivers in home-health industries, healthcare facility location, inventory management of blood products, kidney exchange optimization and optimization in radiation therapy (intensity-modulated radiation - IMRT and volumetric modulated arc therapy - VMAT) are introduced. A project is required.
INDU 6611 Applied Industrial Systems Analytics (4 credits)
Prerequisites: INDU 6121,6310.
The course covers Analytics as it is divided into three categories according to functional classification of analytics methods: descriptive, predictive, and prescriptive. By taking  a hands-on teaching approach, graduate students are taught a set of techniques of descriptive and predictive analytics, which emphasizes extensive analysis of real (or realistic) data sets from a variety of organizations such as manufacturing, service and healthcare using statistical packages. Students are also taught techniques for proper visualization and presentation of the results of their analysis. Specific analytics methods such as logistic regression, time series, decision trees, support vector machines, k-nearest neighbors, k-means are covered. A project is required.
INDU 6990 Industrial Engineering Capstone (9 credits)
Prerequisite: A minimum of 16 credits must be completed in the program.
A supervised design, simulation or experimental capstone design project in the students’ area of specialization. Students may work in groups to undertake:
A project with a company, governmental organization, or a NGO, supervised jointly by a faculty member and a member of the partner organization;
An engineering design that has potential to be commercialized, where a faculty member or District 3 representative supervises the project.
Students may also opt to tackle a research problem under the supervision of a faculty member.
A written report and a public presentation is required. Final report must include a detailed description of the industry experience or the research problem and clearly outline the engineering analysis. This is a two-term course (Fall and Winter only).
Note: Students cannot take this course for credit towards MASc or PhD degrees.
INDU 6991 Engineering Management Industrial Stage I (8 Credits)
Prerequisite: A minimum of 16 credits must be completed in the program.
The Industrial Stage I is designed to provide students with the opportunity to complete an engineering management project in a company, governmental organization, or a NGO under the supervision of an organization partner and a faculty member. Students are required to provide a written report and give a seminar.
Note: Students cannot take this course for credit towards MASc or PhD degrees.
INDU 6992 Engineering Management Industrial Stage II (8 Credits)
Prerequisite: INDU 6991.
The Industrial Stage II is designed to provide students with the additional opportunity to complete the second engineering management project in a company, governmental organization, or a NGO under the supervision of an organization partner and a faculty member. Students are required to provide a written report and give a seminar.
Note: Students cannot take this course for credit towards MASc or PhD degrees.
MECH 6011 Analysis and Design of Pneumatic Systems (4 credits)
Principles and operating characteristics of fluidic elements; modelling of wall attachment; beam deflection; turbulent and vortex amplifiers; design and analysis of microdiaphram and diaphram ejector amplifiers; methods of evaluation performance characteristics of fluid devices; passive fluidic elements; digital and analog fluidic circuit theories and their applications; case studies of fluidic systems. A project on selected topics is required.
MECH 6021 Design of Industrial Control Systems (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6101 or equivalent.
Analog and digital control system design. Analog controller design methods: lead and lag compensators, pole placement, model matching, two-parameter configuration, plant input/output feedback configuration. Introduction to state-space control system. State estimator and state feedback. Introduction to digital control system. Z-transform. Difference equations. Stability in the Z-domain. Digital implementation of analog controllers. Equivalent digital plant method. Alias signals. Selection of sampling time. PID controller. A project on specific topic or applications is required.
MECH 6041 Virtual Systems Engineering (4 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the instructor.
Theory and application of virtual systems with an emphasis on virtual prototyping of mechanical systems. Virtual system modelling: particle systems, rigid body systems, lumped parameter models, and multi-domain system modelling. Non-real-time simulation methods: numerical integration methods, stiff systems and implicit methods. Hardware-in-the-loop simulation (HIL): Real-time simulation, multi-rate simulation and scheduling. Stability, invariance, and robustness. Virtual environments. Distributed simulation and time delay analysis. Design and analysis of virtual engineering systems: specification, design, verification, validation and prototype testing. A project is required.
MECH 6051 Process Dynamics and Control (*) (4 credits)
Dynamics of mechanical and chemical processes: linear and nonlinear system capacity, resistance, piping complexes; characteristics and dynamics of control valves; process time constants; proportional, reset and derivative control actions; feed forward and cascade control, direct digital control case studies on design of level control; p-4 control and heat exchanger control; analysis of industrial hazards and security. A project on selected topics of current interest is required.
MECH 6061 Analysis and Design of Hydraulic Control Systems (*) (4 credits)
Introduction to fluid power control technology; fundamentals of fluid transmission media; basic hydraulic control system components and circuits; hydraulic servosystems; modelling and dynamic analysis of hydraulic systems – design examples; basic pneumatic control system components and circuits – design examples. A projects on selected topics is required.
MECH 6081 Fuel Control Systems for Combustion Engines (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6201.
Introduction to fuel control systems for combustion engines with fuel injection. Dynamics of fuel injection for steady-state and transient process; injection characteristics for different combustion patterns; speed and power control in relation to engine characteristics; design principles of fuel systems; special requirements for starting, shut-down, schedule modulation; testing methods; wear and reliability problems. Case studies include: multicylinder in-line injection pump, rotary distributor injection pump, mecano-pneumatic fuel control unit. Full term project work on alternative fuel delivery systems and emissions control for combustion engines. Modelling and simulation. Demonstration of alternative fuel injection system on diesel engine in lab.
MECH 6091 Flight Control Systems (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6101 or equivalent.
Basics of flight dynamics modelling: axes systems and notation; equations of motion; aerodynamic forces and moments, airplane stability, aircraft on the ground; simulator flight model design. Flight instruments: classification; principles of operation, cockpit displays. Flight controls basics: configuration; control forces; primary and secondary controls. Introduction to automatic flight control: stability augmentation; autopilots; flight guidance and flight management systems; design examples. Flight simulation: classification; standards and regulations; system configuration and components. Projects on selected topics are required.
MECH 6101 Kinetic Theory of Gases (4 credits)
Equations of state for gases; molecular explanation of equations of state; introduction to quantum mechanics; the molecular theory of thermal energy and heat capacity; molecular velocity distribution, molecular collisions and the transport properties of gases, introduction to chemical kinetics. A project on specific topic or applications is required.
MECH 6111 Gas Dynamics (*) (4 credits)
Combined effects in one-dimensional flow; multidimensional flow; method of characteristics; one-dimensional treatment of non-steady gas dynamics; shock wave interactions; instability phenomena of supersonic intake diffusers; shock-boundary layer interactions. Projects on unsteady gas dynamics and on shock wave propagation and interactions are required.
MECH 6121 Aerodynamics (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6201.
Flow conservation equations, incompressible Navier-Stokes equations, inviscid irrotational and rotational flows: the Euler equations, the potential and stream function equations. Kelvin, Stokes and Helmholtz theorems. Elementary flows and their superposition, panel method for non-lifting bodies. Airfoil and wing characteristics, aerodynamics forces and moments coefficients. Flow around thin airfoils, Biot-Savart law, vortex sheets. Flow around thick airfoils, the panel method for lifting bodies. Flow around wings, Prandtl’s lifting line theory, induced angle and downwash, unswept wings, swept compressibility correction rules, the area rule. Transonic flow: small disturbance equation, full potential equation, supercritical airfoils. A project on specific topic or applications is required.
MECH 6131 Conduction and Radiation Heat Transfer (4 credits)
Solutions by analytical, numerical, and analogue methods of steady and transient temperature fields with and without heat sources; introduction to convection. Basic concepts and relations of radiation heat transfer, radiation of strongly absorbing media, and radiation of weakly absorbing media. A project on selected topics is required.
MECH 6141 Heat Exchanger Design (4 credits)
Review of heat transfer and flow losses; design consideration of heat exchangers; double pipe exchanger; shell and tube exchanger; extended surfaces; condenser, evaporator, regenerator, cooling tower. A project on selected topics is required.
MECH 6161 Gas Turbine Design (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: MECH 6171.
Study of practical criteria which influence the design of a gas turbine engine including relevant mechanical and aerodynamic constraints. The aerodynamics of each of the three major components of a modern turbo-fan engine, namely the compressor, the combustor and the turbine is considered. Air system acoustics, engine aerodynamic matching of components and modern performance testing methods. A design project is assigned for each of these components. A project on specific topic or applications is required.
MECH 6171 Turbomachinery and Propulsion (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6201.
Review of the gas turbine engine cycle and components arrangement. Types of turbo-propulsion for aircraft: turboprop, turbofan and turbojet. Energy transfer in incompressible and compressible turbomachines: the Euler equation, velocity triangles. Axial-flow compressors; mean-line analysis. Mechanisms of losses in turbomachines. Three-dimensional motion in turbomachines; the radial equilibrium equation and its numerical solution by finite difference methods. Dimensional analysis of incompressible and compressible flow in turbomachines, compressor and turbine performance maps; surge and stall. Centrifugal compressors. Axial-flow turbines. Prediction of performance of gas turbines, components matching. Projects on selected topics are required.
MECH 6181 Heating, Air Conditioning and Ventilation (*) (4 credits)
The effect of air temperature, humidity and purity on physiological comfort; overall heat transmission coefficients of building sections, air infiltration, ventilation and solar radiation loads; heating and air conditioning load calculations; heating, air conditioning and ventilating systems, equipment and controls; design of hot water piping and air distribution systems, pressure drop calculations; selection and specifications of mechanical equipment for heating, ventilation and air conditioning applications. A project on selected applications is required.
MECH 6191 Combustion (4 credits)
Prerequisite: MECH 6111.
Chemical thermodynamics; review of chemical kinetics; conservation equations for multicomponent reacting systems; detonation and deflagration of premixed materials; premixed laminar flames; gaseous diffusion flames, droplet combustion; turbulent flames; two-phase reacting systems; chemically reacting boundary layers. Projects on selected topics are required.
MECH 6231 Helicopter Flight Dynamics (4 credits)
Prerequisites: ENGR 6311 and MECH 6121, previously or concurrently.
Fundamental aspects of helicopter technology; rotary wing aerodynamics; aeromechanical stability; hover and forward flight performance; ground and air resonance; introduction to vibration and structural dynamic problems in helicopter; case studies in the rotorcraft field. Case studies and projects on selected topics are required.
MECH 6241 Operational Performance of Aircraft (4 credits)
Prerequisite: MECH 6121.
Introduction to fixed-wing aircraft operation. Flying environment and its measurement by aircraft instrumentation. Computation of lift and drag, effects of viscosity and compressibility. Review of piston, turboprop, turbojet and turbofan powerplants. Operational performance of aircraft in climb, cruise, descent and on ground. Advanced aircraft systems. Operational considerations in aircraft design. Projects on selected topics are required.
MECH 6251 Space Flight Mechanics and Propulsion Systems (4 credits)
Prerequisite: MECH 6111 or permission of the instructor.
Classification of space propulsion systems; Tsiolkovskij’s equation; ideal rocket and nozzle design; flight performance; basic orbital mechanics; chemical propellant rocket performance analysis; fundamentals of liquid and solid propellant rocket motors; electric, solar, fusion thruster. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken MECH 7221 may not receive credit for this course.
MECH 6301 Vibration Problems in Rotating Machinery (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6311.
Torsional vibrations critical speeds, rotors driven by reciprocating machines, finite element modelling, whirling of shafts, gyroscopic effects, rotors on fluid film bearings, instability in torsional and bending vibrations, balancing, response to support excitations, condition monitoring. Projects on selected applications are required.
MECH 6311 Noise and Vibration Control (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6311.
Introduction to noise and vibration, measurement units. Review of wave theory, noise control criteria and standards, sources and nature of mechanical equipment noise, devices for noise control such as silencers, baffles and acoustic enclosures. Machinery vibration sources, radiation of noise from vibrating structures, devices and methods for vibration control such as isolators, dampers, absorbers and in-situ balancing. Active control of noise and vibration. Projects on selected applications are required.
MECH 6321 Optimum Design of Mechanical Systems (4 credits)
Survey of practical methods for optimum design of mechanical systems; optimal performance criteria and selection of design variables. Introduction to analytical and numerical optimization methods for single- and multi-variable unconstrained problems: direct search and gradient methods. Constrained optimization. Optimality criterion techniques for mechanical systems. Case studies in the area of machine tools, structural systems, machine element design, vehicle design, and hydraulic control systems. Discussion on commercial software packages, their capability, availability and limitations. An optimization project on selected topics is required.
MECH 6341 Engineering Analysis of Smart Materials and Structures (4 credits)
Topics include introduction to smart materials and structures; overview of mathematical models for mechanical and electrical systems; mathematical representation of smart systems; piezoelectric materials and their constitutive equations; electromechanical coupling in piezoelectric based systems and structures and their governing equations; shape memory alloys and their constitutive models; electrical activation of shape memory alloys and their dynamic modelling; electrorheological (ER) and magnetorheological (MR) fluids and elastomers; constitutive models for ER and MR fluids and elastomers; dynamic modelling and vibration analysis of ER and MR based adaptive devices and structures; application of smart materials as energy dissipating elements in structural systems for passive, semi-active and active vibration control; application of smart materials in motion control. A project is required.
MECH 6351 Modal Analysis of Mechanical Systems (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6311.
Natural frequencies and normal modes of multi-degree-of-freedom systems; orthogonality of normal modes; eigenvalue and eigenvector extraction methods; vibration response using normal mode analysis; complex natural frequencies and complex modes in damped systems, modal damping random response considerations; nonsymmetric systems using biorthogonality relations; modal parameter identification from tests, application of modal analysis to mechanical systems. Projects on selected applications are required.
MECH 6361 Mechanics of Biological Tissues (4 credits)
The course deals with mechanical behaviour of tissues in human body such as bone, cartilage, ligaments, tendons, blood vessels, muscles, skin, teeth, nerves. Classification of biological tissues; mechanical properties in vivo and in vitro testing; constitutive relationships, viscoelastic behaviour and rate/time dependency; remodelling and adaption due to mechanical loading; analogous mechanical systems. A project on current topic is required.
MECH 6421 Metal Machining and Surface Technology (4 credits)
Theoretical and practical aspects of mechanics and dynamics of metal machining; tool geometry in machine and working reference systems with their transformation matrices; machinability; wear; cutting forces; temperature distribution; tool material unconventional machining; machining economics; optimizing techniques for cutting conditions; surface mechanics and application of random processes. A project on selected topics is required.
MECH 6431 Introduction to Tribology (Wear, Friction and Lubrication) (4 credits)
Contact between stationary surfaces; dry friction; rolling contract; wear; boundary lubrication; lubricating oils and greases; hydrodynamic journal bearings; case studies in Tribology as applied to design and manufacturing problems. A project on specific topic or applications is required.
MECH 6441 Stress Analysis in Mechanical Design (4 credits)
Stress analysis for design of elastic and visco-elastic mechanical components subject to thermal, fatigue, vibrational and chemical environments; buckling and creep; cumulative damage. Case studies, and project from selected applications are required.
MECH 6451 Computer-Aided Mechanical Design (4 credits)
Concept of value and decision theory in design; design application and case studies in the implementation of digital computer-oriented design of engineering systems. Examples include design of specific machine elements, design of vehicle suspension, hydraulic positioning systems, ship propulsion system, multi-speed gear box, and cam drives. Introduction to identification, optimization, and parameter sensitivity. Implementation of these methods uses remote terminals and graphic display units. A project is required.
MECH 6471 Aircraft Structures (4 credits)
Prerequisite: MECH 6441 or equivalent.
Aero/performance aspects of aircraft structures; Airworthiness and design considerations; Materials; Static, vibratory and aeroelastic loadings; Propulsion-induced loadings; Functions and fabrication of structural components; Stress analysis of wings, fuselages, stringers, fuselage frames, wing ribs, cut-outs in wings and fuselages, and laminated structures; Buckling of aircraft structures: local buckling, instability of stiffened panels; flexural-torsional buckling; Fracture and fatigue failures. Case studies.
MECH 6481 Aeroelasticity (*) (4 credits)
Aerodynamic loading of elastic airfoils; phenomenon of divergence; effect of flexible control surface on divergence of main structure; divergence of one- and two-dimensional wing models; phenomenon of flutter; flutter of two- and three-dimensional wings; approximate analysis techniques; flutter prevention and control; panel flutter in high speed vehicles; flutter of turbomachine bladings; vortex induced oscillations; bridge buffeting. A project on specific applications is required.
MECH 6491 Engineering Metrology and Measurement Systems (4 credits)
Introduction to metrology, linear and geometric tolerancing, non-optical and optical methods in form measurement, fundamentals of optical metrology, interferometry - theory and overview, Moiré and phase shifting interfereometry, speckle interferometry and holography, light sources, detectors and imaging systems. Applications to precision measurement, Doppler vibrometry and dynamic characterization, applications to MEMS (Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems), and special topics include: nanometrology, X-ray interferometry and interference spectroscopy. A project is required.
MECH 6501 Advanced Materials (4 credits)
Advanced composites. Polymer matrix composites. Resins and fibers. Metal matrix composites. Ceramic matrix composites. Interfaces. Mechanical properties. Applications. A project on selected topics of current interest is required.
MECH 6511 Mechanical Forming of Metals (*) (4 credits)
Mechanisms of plastic deformation at ambient and elevated temperatures; plasticity theory; mechanical forming processes; forging; rolling; extrusion; wire drawing; deep drawing; bending; results of processing; mechanical properties; residual stresses; fibrous textures and preferred orientations; effects of annealing. Process modelling by shearline or finite element analysis. A project on current research topics and selected applications is required.
MECH 6521 Manufacturing of Composites (*) (4 credits)
Hand lay-up. Autoclave curing. Compression molding. Filament winding. Resin transfer molding. Braiding. Injection molding. Cutting. Joining. Thermoset and thermoplastic composites. Process modelling and computer simulation. Nondestructive evaluation techniques. A project on selected topics of current interest is required.
MECH 6531 Casting (4 credits)
Phase equilibrium diagrams; mechanisms of solidification; design of castings for various moulding processes, section sizes, dimensional accuracies and surface finishes; continuous casting; control of grain size; segregation and porosity. Defects in castings. A project on current research topic and selected applications is required.
MECH 6541 Joining Processes and Nondestructive Testing (4 credits)
Principles of joining; fusion welding; arc, torch, plasma, electron beam, resistance, etc; solid state welding; heterogeneous hot joining (brazing, soldering); heterogeneous cold joining; metallurgy of joints; joint properties; nondestructive testing processes; radiography, ultrasonic, magnetic particle, die penetrant, etc. A project on current research topic or selected applications is required.
MECH 6551 Fracture (4 credits)
Fracture mechanisms; ductile and cleavage; brittle fracture; notch effects; propagation of cracks; ductile-brittle transition; inter-granular fracture; hydrogen embrittlement; fatigue initiation mechanisms; crack propagation; preventive design; creep failure, mechanisms maps, fatigue; pore formation; grain boundary sliding; high temperature alloys, testing techniques; fractography. A project on current research topics and selected applications is required.
MECH 6561 High Strength Materials (4 credits)
Studies of the microstructures responsible for high strength and of the thermomechanical treatments producing these microstructures; dislocation theory; strain hardening; strengthening by solid-solution, massive hard phases, precipitation, dispersed particles, and martensitic and bainitic structures; fibre and particulate composites; surface treatments; residual stresses of thermal or mechanical origin. A project on current research topics and selected applications is required.
MECH 6571 Corrosion and Oxidation of Metals (4 credits)
Electrochemical corrosion and preventative measures. Stress corrosion, corrosion fatigue. Oxidation at low and high temperatures and protective measures. Selection of alloys and coatings. A project on current research topic or selected applications is required.
MECH 6581 Mechanical Behaviour of Polymer Composite Materials (*) (4 credits)
General applications of polymer composite materials in the aircraft, aerospace, automobile, marine, recreational and chemical processing industries. Different fibres and resins. Mechanics of a unidirectional lamina. Transformation of stress, strain, modulus and compliance. Off-axis engineering constants, shear and normal coupling coefficients. In-plane and flexural stiffness and compliance of different laminates including cross-ply, angle-ply, quasi-isotropic and general bidirectional laminates. Strength of laminates and failure criteria. Micro-mechanics. Projects on selected applications are required.
MECH 6601 Testing and Evaluation of Polymer Composite Materials and Structures (4 credits)
Theory and practice for the determination of tensile, compression and shear properties of composite materials; techniques for the determination of physical and chemical properties; non-destructive techniques such as ultrasonics, acousto-ultrasonics, acoustic emission, infrared and lasers for evaluation of composite structures. A project on selected topics of current interest is required.
MECH 6611 Numerically Controlled Machines (4 credits)
Prerequisite: MECH 6451 or equivalent.
Positioning and contouring NC machines, typical NC applications; analysis of typical NC systems and design considerations; components. A design project on multi-surface machine parts is required.
MECH 6621 Microprocessors and Applications (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: A course in industrial electronics or permission of the instructor.
Introduction to the concepts and practices of using microprocessors and micro-computers in such applications as instrumentation, manufacturing, control and automation; architecture and programming techniques; interface logic circuits; I/O systems; case studies of mechanical engineering applications. A project on specific topic or applications is required.
MECH 6631 Industrial Automation (4 credits)
Introduction to mechanization of industrial processes such as machining, material handling, assembling, and quality control; selection of actuators and sensors for mechanization; design of sequential control circuits using classical methods, ladder diagram, travel-step diagram and cascade method; specifying control sequences using GRAFCET and FUP; special purpose circuits such as emergency circuits, timers, and programmable logic controllers (PLCs); case studies dealing with typical industrial manufacturing processes and computer simulation. A project on specific topic or applications is required.
MECH 6641 Engineering Fracture Mechanics and Fatigue (4 credits)
Fracture mechanics and fatigue of machine elements and structures; Linear Elastic Fracture Mechanics (LEFM); Elastic Plastic Fracture Mechanics (EPFM); Finite Element Analysis for fracture; LEFM and EPFM Testing; Fracture mechanics approach to fatigue crack growth problem; Constant-amplitude, variable-amplitude and stochastic loading cases; Industrial applications to mechanical design and fracture and fatigue control in machine elements and structures; Damage tolerance design. A case study or project on selected applications is required.
MECH 6651 Structural Composites (4 credits)
Analysis for design of beams, columns, rods, plates, sandwich panels and shells made of composites; anisotropic elasticity; energy methods; vibration and buckling; local buckling in sandwich structures; free edge effects and delamination; joining; and failure considerations in design. A project on selected applications is required.
MECH 6661 Thermodynamics and Phase Equilibria of Materials (4 credits)
Thermodynamic laws and relationships. Partial and relative state functions: Activities in multicomponent systems, reference and standard states, solution thermodynamics. Thermodynamics of phase transformations and chemical reactions in engineering materials. Calculation of thermodynamic functions and properties. Experimental methods of determining thermodynamic properties. Multicomponent and multiphasic systems. Generalized phase rules, phase diagrams, stability diagrams and other diagram types. Computational thermodynamics for developing engineering materials. A project is required.
MECH 6671 Finite Element Method in Machine Design (4 credits)
Prerequisite: MECH 6441.
Role of Finite element method in machine design. Variational principles. Formulation of the finite element problem in stress, vibration and buckling analyses of machine components. Different elements and interpolation functions. Application in machine design; fracture. A case study or project on selected applications is required.
MECH 6681 Dynamics and Control of Nonholonomic Systems (4 credits)
Kinematics of nonholonomic systems; dynamics of nonholonomic systems, including d’Álembert principle, Euler-Lagrange equations; equations of motion of nonholonomic systems with Lagrangian multipliers; the reaction of ideal nonholonomic constraints; nonholonomic Caplygin systems; Bifurcation and stability analysis of the nonholonomic systems. Analysis and design of nonlinear control of nonholonomic systems, including kinematic control and dynamic control as well as force control. Controller designs with uncertain nonholonomic systems. Application examples including control of wheeled mobile robots and walking robots. A project is required.
MECH 6691 Optical Microsystems (4 credits)
Microfabrication and micromachining required for optical microsystems; optical microsystem modelling, simulation, sensitivity analysis. Properties of materials suitable for optical MEMS (Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems). Measurements, sensing and actuation suitable for optical microsystems. Introduction to micro-optical components; optical waveguide-based systems. Design of different optical MEMS devices. Chemical and biochemical sensing with optical microsystems. Assembly, packaging and testing of optical MEMS devices. A project is required.
MECH 6741 Mechatronics (*) (4 credits)
Introduction to mechatronics; basic elements of mechatronic systems. Measurement systems: including principles of measurement systems; sensors and transducers; signal conditioning processes and circuits; filters and data acquisition. Actuation systems: mechanical actuation systems and electrical actuation systems. Controllers: control modes; PID controller; performance measures; introduction to digital controllers and robust control. Modelling and analysis of mechatronic systems; performance measures; frequency response; transient response analysis; stability analysis. A project is required.
MECH 6751 Vehicle Dynamics (*) (4 credits)
Tire-terrain interactions; side-slip; cornering and aligning properties of tires: camber angle and camber torque; estimation of braking-tractive and cornering forces of tires; steady-state handling of road vehicles: steering response and directional stability; handling and directional response of vehicles with multiple steerable axles: handling of articulated vehicles: handling and directional response of tracked and wheeled off-road vehicles; directional response to simultaneous braking and steering. A project on research topics is required.
MECH 6761 Vehicular Internal Combustion Engines (*) (4 credits)
Mechanical design of vehicular engines; gas exchange and combustion engine processes; combustion chambers design; fuels and fuel supply; ignition and control systems; cooling and lubrication of engines; emissions formation and control; engine operational characteristics - matching with vehicles; enhancement of engine performance; engine testing; environmental impact of vehicular engines; recent developments in energy-efficient and “clean” engines. Design of calculation project of vehicular engine. Project work on alternative fuel delivering systems and emissions control for combusion engines. Modelling and simulation. Demonstration of alternative fuel injection system on diesel engine in lab.
MECH 6771 Driverless Ground Vehicles (*) (4 credits)
Definition and classifications; case studies of major industrial and research vehicle prototypes; applications; kinematic modelling for feedback control of a driverless vehicle as a planar rigid body; vehicle motion and its relation to steering and drive rates of its wheels; co-ordinate systems assignment; transformation matrices; condition for rolling without skidding and sliding; sensor models and sensor integrations; dead-reckoning control; global and local path planning; introduction to dynamic modelling of driverless vehicle with and without the dynamics of wheel assemblies; design of optimal controllers; introduction to adaptive neuro-morphic controller. Projects are an integral part of the course for which the following may be used: TUTSIM, FORTRAM, or C. A project on selected topics is required.
MECH 6781 Guided Vehicle Systems (*) (4 credits)
Definition and classification of guided transportation systems; track characterization: alignment, gage, profile and cross-level irregularities; wheel-rail interactions: rolling contact theories, creep forces; modelling of guided vehicle components; wheelset, suspension, truck and car body configurations, suspension characteristics; performance evaluation: stability/hunting, ride quality; introduction to advanced guided vehicles. A project on selected topics is an integral part of the course.
MECH 6791 Aircraft Hydro-Mechanical and Fuel Systems (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6201.
This course focuses on design principles and sizing of the following aircraft systems: hydraulic system, primary and secondary flight control actuation systems, landing gear systems, and fuel system. Traditional and new technology implementations in aircraft, helicopters and other aerospace vehicles are considered. Associated standards and regulations are described. Principles of architecture development and integration, as well as engineering tools for system sizing and simulation are covered. A project is required.
MECH 6891 Aircraft Pneumatic and Electrical Power Systems (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6201.
This course focuses on design principles and sizing of the following aircraft systems: electrical power system, auxiliary and emergency power systems, environmental control system, ice and rain protection system, and pneumatic power system. Traditional and new technology implementations in aircraft, helicopters and other aerospace vehicles are considered. Associated standards and regulations are described. Principles of architecture development and integration, as well as engineering tools for system sizing and simulation are covered. A project is required, including a laboratory component.
MECH 691 Topics in Mechanical Engineering I (4 credits)
See Note in Topic Area E02
MECH 6941 Concurrent Engineering in Aerospace Systems (4 credits)
Introduction: objectives, definitions, impact on product development; process modelling and optimization; forming of engineering team; selection of techniques, methodology and tools; market design focus vs. quality design focus; development time management; process integration; aerospace case studies/projects, future trends.
MECH 6961 Aerospace Case Study I
See Mechanical & Industrial Engineering section.
MECH 6971 Aerospace Case Study II
See Mechanical & Industrial Engineering section.
Note: MECH 6961 and MECH 6971 are restricted to students registered in aerospace engineering programs at Concordia or participating universities. These courses cover topical case studies drawn from aerospace industrial experience. They are conducted in a modular form by experienced engineers who specialize in one or more facets of this industry. They are given in collaboration with the other participating universities and may be conducted at any of the Montreal universities in the language of convenience to the instructor.
MECH 7011 Dynamics of Hydraulic Control Systems (4 credits)
Prerequisites: MECH 6021, 6061.
Review of hydraulic control system technology and the need for dynamic analyses. Conventional techniques for assuring good response by analysis. Power flow modelling, power bond graphs, and digital simulation techniques. Obtaining dynamic relationships and coefficients. Phenomena which can affect dynamic response. Projects on selected topics are required.
MECH 7101 Convection Heat Transfer (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6201.
Heat transfer in laminar flow, review of the differential and integral forms of the general energy equation for boundary layer regimes; solution of the energy equation for free convection, forced convection and heat transfer in entrance regions. Heat transfer in turbulent flow; review of the energy equation for turbulent flow; momentum-heat transfer analogies; experimental results for forced convection, free convection, and combined free and forced convection. Project or term paper required.
MECH 7501 Design Using Composite Materials (4 credits)
Prerequisite: MECH 6581.
General concept involving design using composite materials. Integral approach to design. Selection of materials. Selection of fabrication techniques. Computer-aided design tools. Consideration for fracture, fatigue, buckling and impact. Joining consideration. Design of tubes, beams, columns. Design of aircraft components. A project on selected topics is required.
MECH 7511 Vehicle Vibration and Control (4 credits)
Dynamic modelling of ground vehicles for analysis of ride performance; ride comfort and safety criteria; modelling of human body; characterization of road inputs; modelling and design of vibration isolators: primary suspension, secondary suspension; active, semi-active and passive isolators; kinematic and dynamic analysis of suspension linkages; laboratory methods for performance evaluation of vehicle suspension systems; software packages and case studies. Projects on selected applications are required.
MECH 7711 Handling and Stability of Road Vehicles (4 credits)
Prerequisite: MECH 6751 or equivalent.
Mathematical methods in vehicle dynamics; tire and suspension modelling and design for handling; static roll; steady turning and off-tracking analysis of straight and articulated road vehicles; directional stability and braking analysis; directional response of articulated vehicles with steerable axles; software packages and case studies. Project on selected topics is an integral part of the course.
MECH 791 Topics in Mechanical Engineering II (4 credits)
See Note in Topic Area E02
MECH 8011 Doctoral Seminar in Mechanical Engineering (***)
Grading on a pass/fail basis only. No credit value.
COMP 6971 Project and Report (4 credits). The purpose of the project report is to provide students in the MApCompSc program with an opportunity to carry out independent project work and to present it in an acceptable form. The project may consist of the following:
A theoretical study of a computer science problem.
A design and/or development project conducted at Concordia.
A design and/or development project conducted as part of the student’s full-time employment, providing the student’s employer furnishes written approval for the pursuit and reporting of the project.
Before registration for a project course, students must obtain written consent of a faculty member who acts as advisor for the report. A form for this consent is available in the Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering.
A four-credit report is due on the last day of classes of the term (fall, winter, summer) in which students are registered. Students are expected to have a preliminary version of their report approved by their advisor before its final submission. On or before the submission deadline, students must submit three copies of the report to their advisor, who grades the report. One copy of the report is returned to the student, one retained by the advisor, and one by the Department.
The report, including an abstract, must be suitably documented and illustrated, should be at least 5000 words in length, must be typewritten on one side of 21.5 cm by 28 cm white paper of quality, and must be enclosed in binding. Students are referred to the latest edition of Form and Style: Thesis, Report, Term Papers by Campbell, Ballou and Slade, published by Houghton Mifflin (Academic).
Industrial Experience Option in the Master of Applied Computer Science
Applicants to the Master of Applied Computer Science may apply to the Industrial Experience option in the industrial milieu through the Institute for Co-operative Education. Students should indicate their choice on the application form. The Institute for Co-operative Education will help them with resumes, cover letters and interview techniques. The suggested schedule is as follows: fall and winter terms will be dedicated to course work followed by one term in industry, culminating with two terms in University for the remaining course work. The industrial experience term will be noted on the student transcript/record.
Students apply to the Industrial Experience option as early as possible, preferably when they enter the program. It is preferable to be bilingual in French and English if they wish to work in Quebec. Students who lack good language skills and still want to be part of the program should improve their language skills prior to final acceptance.
Admission Criteria
Students need to be enrolled in the Industrial Experience option at least the semester before going on a work term. They begin applying for jobs the semester prior to the work term. Previous work experience cannot be used toward credit for the ENCS 6931. Students should have good grades (greater than a CGPA of 3.40) for the master’s program, be full-time and have good communication skills. A Canadian work permit is required. The Departmental Co-op Program Director will recommend final acceptance to the Industrial Experience option.
ENCS 6931 Industrial Stage and Training (9 credits)
Prerequisite: Completion of at least twenty credits in the program and permission of the Departmental Co-op Program Director.
This is an integral component of the Industrial Experience option that is to be completed under the supervision of an experienced engineer/computer scientist in the facilities of a participating company (a Canadian work permit is required).
Each student receives an assessment from the Departmental Co-op Program Director in consultation with the industry supervisor and the faculty advisor. Grading is on a pass/fail basis based on a proposal, monthly progress reports, a final report and a presentation.
SOEN 6971 Project and Report (4 credits). The purpose of the project report is to provide students in the MEng (Software Engineering) program with an opportunity to carry out independent project work and to present it in an acceptable form. The project may consist of the following:
A theoretical study of a software engineering problem.
A design and/or development project conducted at Concordia.
A design and/or development project conducted as part of the student’s full-time employment, providing the student’s employer furnishes written approval for the pursuit and reporting of the project.
Before registration for a project course, students must obtain written consent of a faculty member who acts as advisor for the report. A form for this consent is available in the Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering.
A four-credit report is due on the last day of classes of the term (fall, winter, summer) in which students are registered. Students are expected to have a preliminary version of their report approved by their advisor before its final submission. On or before the submission deadline, students must submit three copies of the report to their advisor, who grades the report. One copy of the report is returned to the student, one retained by the advisor, and one by the Department.
The report, including an abstract, must be suitably documented and illustrated, should be at least 5000 words in length, must be typewritten on one side of 21.5 cm by 28 cm white paper of quality, and must be enclosed in binding. Students are referred to the latest edition of Form and Style: Thesis, Report, Term Papers by Campbell, Ballou and Slade, published by Houghton Mifflin (Academic).
COMP 5201 Computer Organization and Assembly Language (4 credits)
Programming in a subset of a suitably chosen assembly language; instruction-set level view of computers; translation of sample high-level language constructs to the instruction-set level. User-level view of the computer system through an operating system. Privileged modes of operation of the hardware for achieving goals such as protection and resource management; the hierarchy of the memory system as a resource, its concepts and requirements. Input/output including interrupt handling.
COMP 5261 Computer Architecture (3 credits)
Prerequisite: COMP 5461 previously or concurrently.
Computer architecture models: control-flow and data-flow. Concurrency and locality, data dependency theory. Instruction level parallelism. Instruction scheduling. Pipelined processors. Vector processors. Thread level parallelism. Multiprocessors. Shared memory models. Coherence protocols. Interconnection networks. Performance issues. Advanced topics in contemporary computer architectures. Case studies.
COMP 5361 Discrete Structures and Formal Languages (4 credits)
Discrete mathematics: sets, logic, quantifiers, relations, and functions. Regular languages: finite automata (deterministic and non-deterministic), regular expressions, regular grammars, pumping lemmas for regular languages, closure properties for regular languages. Context-free languages: context-free grammars, parsing and ambiguity, normal forms for grammars, pushdown automata, closure properties for context free languages.
COMP 5421 Advanced Programming (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COMP 5511.
Designing classes and programs. Program development. Encapsulation; dependency minimization. Inheritance hierarchies; abstract classes and interfaces; frameworks, Reading and writing files; serialization. Applications of inheritance and generics. Design and use of class libraries; user interface design; database and network programming.
COMP 5461 Operating Systems (4 credits)
Prerequisites: COMP 5201, 5511.
Basic concepts of operating systems and system programming. Processes, interprocess communication, and synchronization, memory allocation, segmentation, paging. Resource allocation, scheduling, performance evaluation. File systems, storage devices, I/O systems. Protection, security, and privacy. Advanced operating system concepts: distributed systems, multi-processor and parallel systems, real-time systems.
COMP 5481 Programming and Problem Solving (4 credits)
Prerequisites: MATH 204, 205 or equivalent.
Overview of programming and problem solving. Operators and expressions. Types, values, and variables; type conversion. Classes, objects, and methods. Assignment, conditional and repetitive statements. Arrays. Input and Output. Program structure and organization; encapsulation. Recursion and its uses. Designing classes and member functions; aggregation and inheritance. Introduction to libraries and their applications. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week. Lab: 3 hours per week.
COMP 5511 Principles of Data Structures (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COMP 5481 or equivalent training or experience in Java programming.
Definition, use, and application of fundamental data structures and associated algorithms. Asymptotic analysis of algorithms. Storage management: arrays, strings, lists and trees. Data abstraction: stacks, queues, priority queues, sets, and tables. Searching and sorting. Programming techniques: designing classes for data structures.
COMP 5531 Files and Databases (4 credits)
Prerequisites: COMP 5361, 5511.
Introduction to file management: basic file structures and access methods, sequential and indexed-sequential files, B+-trees and R-trees; external sorting; dynamic hashing; clustering techniques. Introduction to database management: fundamental data models - hierarchical, network, and relational; data dependencies; normal forms; and relational database design. Formal query languages: relational algebra, calculus; commercial languages: SQL, QBE. Fundamentals of data processing.
COMP 5541 Tools and Techniques for Software Engineering (4 credits)
Prerequisites: COMP 5361, COMP 5511, ENCS 6721; or permission of the Graduate Program Director.
The software life cycle. IEEE and MIL standards for software documentation. Formal methods. Software architectures. Software design and prototyping. Interfacing and encapsulation. Use of libraries, frameworks, and CASE tools. Implementation and maintenance. Verification and validation.
COMP 5611 Elementary Numerical Methods (3 credits)
Prerequisites: COMP 5361, 5511.
Error analysis and computer arithmetic. Numerical methods for solving linear systems, Gaussian elimination, LU decomposition. Numerical solution of non-linear equations, fixed point iterations, rate of convergence. Interpolations and approximations, Lagrange polynomials, divided differences, discrete least-square approximation, Legendre polynomials. Numerical integration, Newton-Cotes formulas, Romberg integration. Emphasis will be on the development of efficient algorithms.
COMP 6971 Project and Report (4 credits)
SOEN 6971 Project and Report (4 credits)
COMP 7941 Master’s Research and Thesis (29 credits)
ENCS 6931 Industrial Stage and Training (9 credits)
SOEN 7941 Master’s Research and Thesis (29 credits)
SOEN 6501 Programming Competency Test
M.Ap.Comp.Sc and M.Eng (SOEN) students must complete SOEN 6501 in their first term after the first registration as full-time (part-time) students in their program. This course is graded on a pass/fail basis and has no credit value. For purposes of registration, this work is designated as SOEN 6501.
C15 - DOCTORAL SEMINAR, RESEARCH, AND THESIS
ENCS 8011 PhD Seminar (2 credits)
ENCS 8511 Doctoral Research Proposal (6 credits)
COMP 8901 Doctoral Research and Thesis (70 credits)
SOEN 8901 Doctoral Research and Thesis (70 credits)
ENCS 8501 Comprehensive Examination
Doctoral students must begin work on ENCS 8501 within 12 (24) months after the first registration as full-time (part-time) students in a PhD program. This course is graded on a pass/fail basis and has no credit value. For purposes of registration, this work will be designated as ENCS 8501.
C16 - COGNATE DISCIPLINES
Students in a master’s program may take courses from Engineering Topic Areas E10, E42, E66, E68 and E70 for credit and also from the course list below, provided that prerequisite requirements are met:
COEN 7311 Protocol Design and Validation
ENCS 6021 Engineering Analysis
ENCS 6161 Probability and Stochastic Processes
ENCS 6181 Optimization Techniques I (*)
Course Descriptions
The following are one-term courses (four credits each) unless otherwise indicated. For additional information concerning course descriptions, prerequisites, and schedules contact the Office of the Associate Dean, Engineering and Computer Science.
Note: Some graduate courses are content equivalent with specific undergraduate courses. These graduate courses, indicated with (*) below, are not available for credit to students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent.
COMP 6231 Distributed System Design (4 credits)
Principles of distributed computing: scalability, transparency, concurrency, consistency, fault tolerance. Client-server interaction technologies: interprocess communication, sockets, group communication, remote procedure call, remote method invocation, object request broker, CORBA, web services. Distributed server design techniques: process replication, fault tolerance through passive replication, high availability through active replication, coordination and agreement transactions and concurrency control. Designing software fault-tolerant highly available distributed systems using process replication. Laboratory: two hours per week.
COMP 6281 Parallel Programming (*) (4 credits)
Migration from Von Neumann to parallel processing architectures: shared-memory and message-passing paradigms; massively parallel computers; recent trends in commodity parallel processing; clusters, multi-core, CPU-GPU based heterogeneous computing. Issues of memory consistency and load balancing. Parallel algorithms for shared-memory and message passing platforms; efficiency and scalability; issues of performance overhead. Parallel programming environments: parallel programming models; languages; software tools. Laboratory: two hours per week. A project is required.
COMP 6311 Animation for Computer Games (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COMP 6761 or equivalent, previously or concurrently.
Introduction to the algorithms, data structures, and techniques used in modelling and rendering dynamic scenes. Topics include principles of traditional animation, production pipeline, animation hardware and software, orientation representation and interpolation, modelling physical and articulated objects, forward and inverse kinematics, motion control and capture, key-frame, procedural, and behavioural animation, camera animation, scripting system, and free-form deformation. A project is required. Laboratory: two hours per week.
COMP 6321 Machine Learning (4 credits)
Introduction to the fundamentals of machine learning. Linear models: linear and polynomial regression, overfitting, model selection, logistic regression, naive Bayes. Non-linear models: decision trees, instance-based learning, boosting, neural networks. Support vector machines and kernels. Computational learning theory. Experimental methodology, sources of error. Structured models: graphical models, deep belief networks. Unsupervised learning: k-means, mixture models, density estimation, expectation maximization, principle component analysis, eigenmaps and other dimensionality reduction methods. Learning in dynamical systems: hidden Markov models and other types of temporal/sequence models. Reinforcement learning. Survey of machine learning and its applications. A project is required. Laboratory: two hours per week.
COMP 6331 Advanced Game Development (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor.
Introduction to advanced aspects of computer games. Game engine design. Artificial Intelligence (AI): non‑player character movement, coordinated movement, pathfinding, world representations; decision making; tactical AI, strategic AI, learning in games. Physics‑based techniques: collision detection and response. Networked gaming: multi‑player games, networking and distributed game design, mobile gaming. Improving realism: cut scenes, 3D sound. A project is required. Laboratory: two hours per week.
COMP 6341 Computer Vision (*) (4 credits)
This course introduces basic techniques and concepts in computer vision including image formation, grouping and fitting, geometric vision, recognition, perceptual organization, and the state-of-the art software tools. Students learn fundamental algorithms and techniques, and gain experience in programming vision-based components; in particular, how to program in OpenCV, a powerful software interface used to process data captured from passive and active sensors. A project is required. Laboratory: two hours per week.
Note: Students who have received credit for COMP 691 (Computer Vision) may not take this course for credit.
COMP 6351 Topics in Scientific Computation (4 credits)
Selected elements of numerical methods that are central to scientific computation. The precise contents of the course may differ somewhat from one offering to the next, but will include the following topics: An introduction to the numerical solution of nonlinear equations, continuation methods, numerical solution of initial value problems in ordinary differential equations, finite difference method, numerical stability theory, stiff equations, boundary value problems in ordinary differential equations, collocation methods, introduction to the numerical solution of partial differential equations, with emphasis on nonlinear diffusion problems. A project is required.
COMP 6361 Numerical Analysis of Nonlinear Equations (4 credits)
An introduction to numerical algorithms for nonlinear equations, including discrete as well as continuous systems. The emphasis is on computer-aided numerical analysis rather than numerical simulation. This course is suitable for scientists and engineers with a practical interest in nonlinear phenomena. Topics include computational aspects of: homotopy and continuation methods, fixed points and stationary solutions, asymptotic stability, bifurcations, periodic solutions, transition to chaos, conservative systems, travelling wave solutions, discretization techniques. A variety of applications will be considered. Numerical software packages will be available. A project is required.
COMP 6381 Digital Geometric Modelling (4 credits)
This course introduces the digital geometry modelling pipeline focusing on fundamental data structures and algorithms for digital representation and processing of 3D geometry.  Students  study a wide range of applications and solutions in computer-aided design, engineering, architecture reverse engineering, and medical applications. As triangle meshes are by far the most popular representation for 3D geometry, this course focuses on triangle mesh representations and data structures that enable the programmer to efficiently query and edit geometry. In addition, the course covers spline modelling: Hermite splines, Bezier splines, and B-Splines. A project is required.
COMP 6411 Comparative Study of Programming Languages (4 credits) Comparison of several high-level programming languages with respect to application areas, design, efficiency, and ease of use. The selected languages will demonstrate programming paradigms such as functional, logical, and scripting. Static and dynamic typing. Compilation and interpretation. Advanced implementation techniques. A project is required.
COMP 6421 Compiler Design (*) (4 credits)
Compiler organization and implementation: lexical analysis and parsing, syntax-directed translation, code optimization. Run-time systems. A project is required.
COMP 6461 Computer Networks and Protocols (4 credits)
Direct link networks: encoding, framing, error detection, flow control, example networks. Packet switching and forwarding: bridges, switches. Internetworking: Internet Protocol, routing, addressing, IPv6, multicasting, mobile IP. End-to-end protocols: UDP, TCP. Network security concepts. Application-level protocols. Laboratory: two hours per week.
COMP 6521 Advanced Database Technology and Applications (4 credits)
Review of standard relational databases, query languages. Query processing and optimization. Parallel and distributed databases. Information integration. Data warehouse systems. Data mining and OLAP. Web databases and XML Active and logical databases, spatial and multimedia data management. Laboratory: Two hours per week.
COMP 6531 Foundations of the Semantic Web (4 credits)
Web markup languages, World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) standards, Extensible Markup Language (XML) Resource Description Framework (RDF), schema for markup languages, Semantic Web, ontology development, markup languages for ontologies, Web Ontology Language (OWL), logical foundations of ontologies, description logics, reasoning with ontologies. A project is required.
COMP 6591 Introduction to Knowledge-Base Systems (4 credits)
Review of first-order logic, relational algebra, and relational calculus. Fundamentals of logic programming. Logic for knowledge representation. Architecture of a knowledge-base system. Fundamentals of deductive databases. Top-down and bottom-up query processing. Some important query processing strategies and their comparison. Project or term paper on current research topics.
COMP 6621 Discrete Mathematics of Paul Erdös (4 credits)
Introduction to the methods and proof techniques of Paul Erdös that are particularly applicable to Computer Science. Proof of Bertrand’s postulate. The Erdös-Szekeres and the de Bruijn-Erdös theorems. Ramsey’s theorem and Ramsey numbers. Van der Waerden’s theorem and Van der Waerden numbers. Delta-systems and a proof of the Erdös-Lovász conjecture. The Erdös-Ko-Rado theorem. Extremal graph theory. Random graphs and graph colouring. The probabilistic method and its applications in theoretical Computer Science. A project is required.
COMP 6631 Large-Scale Optimization (4 credits)
Mathematical modelling of large-scale optimization models. Design and implementation of large-scale optimization techniques: decomposition methods (Benders, Dantzig-Wolfe, Lagrangian Relaxation, Column Generation), branch-and-price techniques. Large-scale linear and non-linear programming techniques for network optimization and integer/discrete programming. Techniques for nonlinear non-convex continuous optimization: branch-and-bound methods, DC (difference of convex functions) programming, bilinear and biconvex optimization. Heuristics and meta-heuristics. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a COMP 691Y number may not take this course for credit.
COMP 6641 Theory of Computation (4 credits)
General properties of algorithmic computations. Turing machines, universal Turing machines. Turing computable functions as a standard family of algorithms. Primitive recursive functions. Church’s thesis, recursive sets. Recursively enumerable sets and their properties. Rice’s theorem. Time and space complexity measures. Hierarchy of complexity measures. Advanced topics in complexity theory. A project is required.
COMP 6651 Algorithm Design Techniques (4 credits)
Mathematical preliminaries; Empirical and theoretical measures of algorithm efficiencies; Optimization and combinatorial techniques and algorithms including greedy algorithms, dynamic programming, branch-and-bound techniques and graph network algorithms; Amortized complexity analysis; String matching algorithms; NP-complete problems and approximate solutions; Probabilistic algorithms. A project is required.
COMP 6661 Combinatorial Algorithms (4 credits)
Representation and generation of combinatorial objects; search techniques; counting and estimation. Projects on selected applications from combinatorics and graph theory.
COMP 6711 Computational Geometry (4 credits)
Efficient algorithms and data structures to solve geometric problems. Problems discussed include convex hulls, line intersections, polygon triangulation, point location, range searching, Voronoi diagrams, Delaunay triangulations, interval trees and segment trees, arrangements, robot motion planning, binary space partitions, quadtrees, and visitility. Algorithmic methods include plane sweep, incremental insertion, randomization, divide and conquer. Emphasis will be given to computation and complexity, with applications in computer graphics, computer aided design, geographic information systems, networks, mesh generation, databases, and robot motion planning. A project is required.
COMP 6721 Applied Artificial Intelligence (*) (4 credits)
The course covers heuristic and adversarial searches for concrete applications. It then discusses automated reasoning, advanced knowledge representation and dealing with uncertainly for Artificial Intelligence applications. Finally, it introduces autoencoders, recurrent neural networks and sequence to sequence models. A project is required. Laboratory: two hours per week.
COMP 6731 Pattern Recognition (*) (4 credits)
Pre-processing. Feature extraction and selection. Similarity between patterns and distance measurements. Syntactic and statistical approaches. Clustering analysis. Bayesian decision theory and discriminant functions. Clustering and classification techniques. Applications. A project is required. Laboratory: two hours per week.
COMP 6741 Intelligent Systems (*) (4 credits)
Knowledge representation and reasoning. Uncertainty and conflict resolution. Design of intelligent systems. Grammar-based, rule-based, and blackboard architectures. A project is required. Laboratory: two hours per week.
COMP 6751 Natural Language Analysis (4 credits)
Introduction to natural language processing. Structure of English. Grammars and parsing. Lexical and compositional semantics. Pragmatic issues. Applications in text mining and information extraction. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for COMP 7741 before September 2011 may not take this course for credit.
COMP 6761 Advanced 3D Graphics for Game Programming (4 credits)
Fundamental algorithms, techniques, and software engineering principles for 3D graphics. Introduction to real-time graphics application architecture; review of basic 3D concepts of modelling, viewing, and rendering. 3D graphics functions, pipeline, and performance. Hierarchical 3D graphics. Algorithms for occlusion culling, collision detection, photorealism, shadows, and textures. Current trends and state-of-the-art graphics and physics algorithms. Laboratory: Two hours per week.
COMP 6771 Image Processing (*) (4 credits)
Digital image fundamentals; image enhancement: histogram processing, filtering in the spatial domain, filtering in the frequency domain; image restoration and reconstruction; image segmentation: line detection, Hough transform, edge detection and linking, thresholding, region splitting and merging; image compression; introduction to wavelet transform and multi-resolution processing. A project is required. Laboratory: two hours per week.
COMP 6781 Statistical Natural Language Processing (4 credits)
The course covers robust methods to natural language processing (NLP) and their applications to manipulate large text collections. Topics covered in this course include: Zipf’s law, information retrieval, statistical machine translation, N-gram language models and smoothing techniques, word sense disambiguation, part-of-speech tagging and probabilistic grammars and parsing. A project is required.
COMP 6791 Information Retrieval and Web Search (*) (4 credits)
Basics of information retrieval (IR): Boolean, vector space and probabilistic models. Tokenization and creation of inverted files. Weighting schemes. Evaluation of IR systems: precision, recall, E-measure. Relevance feedback and query expansion. Application of IR to Web search engines: XML, link analysis, PageRank algorithm. Text categorization and clustering techniques as used in spam filtering. A project is required. Laboratory: two hours per week.
COMP 6811 Bioinformatics Algorithms (4 credits)
The principal objectives of the course are to cover the major algorithms used in bioinformatics; sequence alignment, multiple sequence alignment, phylogeny; classifying patterns in sequences; secondary structure prediction; 3D structure prediction; analysis of gene expression data. This includes dynamic programming, machine learning, simulated annealing, and clustering algorithms. Algorithmic principles will be emphasized. A project is required.
COMP 6821 Bioinformatics Databases and Systems (4 credits)
The principal objectives of the course are to survey the needs of bioinformatics for data management, knowledge management, and computational support; to provide in-depth description of an example of each kind of database and system; and to introduce advanced database technology and software technology relevant to the needs of bioinformatics. A project is required.
COMP 691 Topics in Computer Science I (4 credits)
Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, providing that course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g., COMP 691A, COMP 691B, etc.
COMP 6961 Graduate Seminar in Computer Science (1 credit)
Students will have to attend a selected set of departmental seminars and submit a comprehensive report on the topics presented in one of the seminars. This course is graded on a pass/fail basis.
COMP 6971 Project and Report (4 credits)
Prerequisite: Completion of 16 credits; a CGPA of 3.40 or greater; permission of the Department.
See Requirements for the Master of/Magisteriate in Applied Computer Science (MApCompSc) section. Project: 8 hours per week.
Note: Students who have received credit for SOEN 6951 or SOEN 6971 may not take this course for credit.
COMP 7241 Parallel Algorithms and Architectures (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COMP 6281 or permission of instructor.
Parallel architectures; memory organization, interconnection structures, data routing techniques. Parallel algorithms; paradigms and design techniques, complexity analysis, algorithms for various computation models. A project is required.
COMP 7251 Mobile Computing and Wireless Networks (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COMP 6461.
Introduction to mobile computing and wireless networks:local (LAN), personal (PAN) and metropolitan (MAN). Mobile ad hoc networks and sensor networks. Algorithms and protocols for medium access, routing, topology control, and reliable transport. A project is required.
COMP 7451 Semantics of Programming Languages (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COMP 6411.
The need for semantic descriptions of programming languages. Classification of semantics: operational, axiomatic, model-theoretic, algebraic, denotational. Classification of languages: procedural, functional, logic, equational. Applications: verification, construction, language design, temporal logic for distributed systems, semantics for advanced languages.
COMP 7521 Cryptography and Data Security (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COMP 6651.
Traditional cryptography. Information theory. Private-key (symmetric-key) and public-key (asymmetric-key) cryptographic algorithms. Advanced Encryption Standard (Rijndael). Cryptographic hash functions. Digital signatures. Data-origin authentication and data integrity. Entity authentication. Key distribution, management, recovery, and exhaustion. Authentication protocols. Security services (confidentiality, authentication, integrity, access control, non-repudiation, and availability) and mechanisms (encryption, data-integrity mechanisms, digital signatures, keyed hashes, access-control mechanisms, challenge-response authentication, traffic padding, and routing control). Projects will be offered in selected topics in cryptography.
COMP 7531 Database Systems Principles (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COMP 6521.
Database models. Algebraic, logical, and deductive database languages. Query equivalence and optimization. Query rewriting, information integration and data exchange. Incomplete information and complex values. Introduction to current research topics. A project is required.
COMP 7651 Advanced Analysis of Algorithms (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COMP 6651.
Amortized analysis of algorithms, NP-hardness and approximation algorithms, online algorithms, randomized algorithms. Selected topics of current interest. Project or term paper.
COMP 7661 Advanced Rendering and Animation (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COMP 6761.
Advanced concepts in rendering and animation with emphasis on computational techniques for synthesizing complex realistic images, both static and dynamic. Topics include: overview of computer graphics techniques in games, cinema, and engineering; realistic rendering methods in real time; animation techniques including physics-based animation. A project is required.
COMP 7751 Advanced Pattern Recognition (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COMP 6731.
Pattern recognition principles; modern methods in digitization and data acquisition; advanced topics in feature extraction and selection; principal component analysis and clustering techniques; multiple classifiers and expert systems; advanced topics in neural networks in pattern recognition, performance evaluation and error reduction. Applications. A project is required.
COMP 7781 Advanced Image Processing (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COMP 6771 or permission of instructor.
Digital image processing; segmentation morphological processing; wavelet transforms and multi-resolution analysis; partial differential equation approach; variational methods; diffusion and shock filters; Markov random field and Bayesian inference; energy minimization framework: snakes, active contours, Mumford-Shah model, level set method; numerical implementation; applications; image inpainting; registration; and document processing. A project is required.
COMP 791 Topics in Computer Science II (4 credits)
Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, providing that course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. COMP 791A, COMP 791B, etc.
COMP 7941 Master’s Research and Thesis (29 credits)
Students are required to submit a thesis prepared under the guidance of a faculty member appointed by the GCS Graduate Studies Committee. The thesis must represent the result of the student’s independent work undertaken after admission to the program. The thesis will be evaluated by a committee appointed by the GCS Graduate Studies Committee.
COMP 8901 Doctoral Research and Thesis (70 credits)
SOEN 6011 Software Engineering Processes (4 credits)
Introduction to software engineering concepts, modern management processes and software lifecycles. Tracking of software requirements and development through issue trackers. Version control practices include integration of feature branching. Validation practices including testing frameworks and code review. Continuous integration and build environments. A practical component on setting up a development environment similar to those used in professional environments. Case studies of successful management processes from open source projects and industry. A project is required.
SOEN 6021 Software Re-engineering (4 credits)
Prerequisite: SOEN 6461 or permission of the instructor. This course introduces software re-engineering, software architecture recovery and reconstruction, and reflexion models. Students use development history to support reengineering, and are exposed to the latest empirical studies on software reengineering and software metrics applied to software re-engineering. Also, students learn how to apply various software re-engineering patterns and software migration strategies. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for SOEN 691 (Software Re-engineering) may not take this course for credit.
SOEN 6211 Semantic Computing (4 credits)
System analysis, architecture, and engineering for semantic software products. Text Mining systems and their architectures. Tagging and Tag Analysis. Recommender Systems and Collaborative Filtering. Crawling the Blogosphere and Opinion Mining. Applying Clustering, Machine Learning, Classification, and Regression. The Web of Data and Semantic Web Technologies: RDF, RDFS, SPARQL. Linked Open Data (LOD). Design and Re-Use of Semantic Web Vocabularies and Ontologies. Semantic Desktops and Semantic Web Information Systems. Semantic Application Development. Application case studies in biomedical research, software development, business intelligence, online gaming, e-commerce and e-science. Research paper seminar. Empirical evaluation methodologies for semantic systems. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a SOEN 691B number may not take this course for credit.
SOEN 6311 Formal Methods (4 credits)
Components of formal systems: formal methods; levels of formalism. Integrating formal methods into the existing software life-cycle process model for a given project. Attributes of a formal specification language. Formal notations based on extended finite-state machines; case studies involving the design of user interfaces, reactive systems, and concurrent systems. Software development using formal methods, including tools for: type checking; debugging; verifying checkable properties; validation of refinements; and code generation from refinements. A project is required.
SOEN 6431 Software Comprehension and Maintenance (4 credits)
The course addresses both technical and managerial views of software comprehension and software maintenance issues. Topics covered in this course include: cognitive models, software visualization, CASE tools, reverse engineering, static and dynamic source code analysis, software configuration management, and introduction to current research topics in software maintenance and program comprehension. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for COMP 6431 may not take this course for credit.
SOEN 6441 Advanced Programming Practices (4 credits)
Problems of writing and managing code. Managing code complexity and quality through a programming process. Self-documenting code, and documentation generation. Software configuration management. Best practices for writing unit tests to control code quality. Advanced practices such as multi-threading concurrency, code reuse, and fault tolerance. A project is required. Laboratory: two hours per week.
SOEN 6461 Software Design Methodologies (4 credits)
Introduction to software design processes and their models. Representations of design/architecture. Software architectures and design plans. Design methods, object-oriented application frameworks, design patterns, design quality and assurance, coupling and cohesion measurements, design verification and documentation. A design project.
Note: Students who have received credit for COMP 6471 before September 2011 may not take this course for credit.
SOEN 6471 Advanced Software Architectures (4 credits)
Study of architectural view models, architectural styles and frameworks; Architectural case studies and extraction of concrete architecture; Architectural design patterns; Model Driven Architecture (MDA), Service Oriented Architecture (SOA). Domain specific architectures such as mobile and cloud computing. A project is required.
SOEN 6481 Software Systems Requirements Specification (4 credits)
The requirements engineering (RE) process. Requirements engineering in different software lifecycle models. Problem analysis. Requirements elicitation. Requirements evaluation. Inconsistency management. Risk analysis. Requirements prioritization and negotiation. Requirements specification: natural language documentation, IEEE and ISO standards. Use cases. Agile processes and user stories. Introduction to formal specification: logics, formal languages. Requirements quality assurance. RE tools. Requirements evolution. Traceability. Domain modelling: UML, ontologies, domain-specific languages. Modelling behaviour. Acceptance criteria. Test cases. Cost models. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for COMP 6481 may not take this course for credit.
SOEN 6491 Software Refactoring (4 credits)
Prerequisite: SOEN 6461.
Topics include an introduction to preventive maintenance, design problems, and refactorings; techniques for the detection of design problems and refactoring opportunities; management of preventive maintenance: visualization, prioritization, ranking, and evolution tracking of design problems; empirical studies on refactoring activities and practices; implementation of source code analysis techniques and refactorings. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for SOEN 691C (Software Refactoring) may not take this course for credit.
SOEN 6501 Programming Competency Test (No credit value)
See Requirements for the Master of/Magisteriate in Applied Computer Science (MApCompSc) or Master of/Magisteriate in Engineering (Software Engineering) sections.
SOEN 6611 Software Measurement (4 credits)
Role of measurement in Software Engineering, theoretical, technical and managerial views on software measurement. Representational theory of measurement. Theoretical validation of software measurement. Goal-driven measurement. Collecting and analyzing software engineering data. Software quality modelling and measuring. Testing and measurement. Reliability models. Functional size measurement methods. Effort estimation models and their usage in project management. Software measurement standards. Tool support. Case studies. A project is required.
SOEN 6751 Human Computer Interface Design (4 credits)
Introduction to human computer interaction. User-centered design process. User modelling. Task analysis. User interface design knowledge (principles, guidelines and patterns). User interface prototyping. User interface evaluation. A project is required. Laboratory: two hours per week.
Note: Note: Students who have received credit for COMP 6751 before September 2011 may not take this course for credit.
SOEN 6761 Multimedia Computing (4 credits)
This course covers the state-of-the-art technology for multimedia computing. The course topics will cover current media types, images, video, audio, graphics and 3D models in terms of algorithms and data structures for their capture, representation, creation, storage, archival, transmission, assembling, presentation and retrieval. This course will cover fundamental ideas in multimedia technology applicable to computer science and software engineering. A project is required.
SOEN 6841 Software Project Management (4 credits)
Fundamental concepts of management activities, demonstrating how it can relate to software engineering and how the two can be mutually supportive throughout software development and maintenance. Overview of object-oriented development; software development processes; quality considerations; activity planning; risk management; monitoring and control; maintenance and evolution; issues of professional ethics and practice, and legal issues. A project is required.
SOEN 6861 Services Computing: Foundations, Design and Implementations (4 credits)
System design with Service Oriented Architecture. Open standards for Web services. Development of SOAP (Service-Oriented Architecture and Programming) and RESTful (REpresentational State Transfer) services. Business process modelling and management. Service composition. Formal models for services. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for SOEN 691A (Services Computing: Foundations, Design and Implementations) may not take this course for credit.
SOEN 691 Topics in Software Engineering (4 credits)
Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. SOEN 691A, SOEN 691B, etc.
SOEN 6951 Software Engineering Case Study (4 credits)
Students will complete a case study of a software project. Whenever possible, the project should be conducted in an industrial environment with the cooperation of the student’s employer.
Note: Students who have received credit for SOEN 6971 or COMP 6971 may not take this course for credit.
SOEN 6971 Project and Report (4 credits)
Prerequisite: Completion of 16 credits; a CGPA of 3.40 or greater; permission of the Department.
See Requirements for the Degree of Master of/Magisteriate in Applied Computer Science (MApCompSc) section. Project: 8 hours per week.
Note: Students who have received credit for COMP 6971 or SOEN 6951 may not take this course for credit.
SOEN 7481 Software Verification and Testing (4 credits)
Prerequisites: SOEN 6461, SOEN 6481.
Overview of current software engineering testing methods, techniques and standards for testing system implementations. Classical white-box testing; dataflow testing; classical black-box testing; integration testing; system testing. Testing measures; test plan. IEEE standard. Object-oriented testing. Test-driven development. Testing quality measures. Test reduction techniques. Techniques for test automation. Tools and techniques for formal verification of software system designs: model checking and theorem proving. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for COMP 7481 may not take this course for credit.
SOEN 7761 Intelligent User Interfaces (4 credits)
Prerequisite: SOEN 6751.
Intelligent systems and intelligent interfaces. A brief introduction to knowledge representation and reasoning. Creation and adaptation of user models. Software agents at the user interface. Applications of these concepts in the development of intelligent user interfaces. Adaptive user interfaces. Selected advanced topics, such as natural language interfaces, speech based user interfaces, and mobile user interfaces. Laboratory: two hours per week. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for COMP 7761 before September 2011 may not take this course for credit.
SOEN 791 Topics in Software Engineering II (4 credits)
Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. SOEN 791A, SOEN 791B, etc.
SOEN 7941 Master’s Research and Thesis (29 credits)
Students are required to submit a thesis prepared under the guidance of a faculty member appointed by the GCS Graduate Studies Committee. The thesis must represent the result of the student’s independent work undertaken after admission to the program. The thesis will be evaluated by a committee appointed by the GCS Graduate Studies Committee.
SOEN 8901 Doctoral Research and Thesis (70 credits)
ARTE 806 Inquiry Through Art Production (3 credits)
In this course students identify the content and the processes essential to their on-going studio performance. Students are expected to develop parallel inquiry into exhibitions, installations, performances, documentations, notation systems and related readings. Evaluation is based on workshop and seminar participation, studio performance and class presentations. Computer access and shared studio space are available. This course may be repeated as ARTE 807.
ARTE 850 Selected Topics in Art Education (3 credits)
A seminar course offering students the opportunity to study various aspects of art education. Specific topics vary from year to year to take advantage of the special expertise of the faculty.
ARTE 867 Directed Studies in Art Education I (3 credits)
Independent study in the area of concentration.
ARTE 868 Directed Studies in Art Education II (3 credits)
Independent study in the area of concentration.
ARTE 870 Critical Perspectives on Art Education: History, Theory and Practice (3 credits)
A seminar course in which students develop critical reading and writing skills while adding to their understanding of developments past and present that have shaped the field of art education.
ARTE 872 Advanced Critical Analysis (3 credits)
Prerequisite: ARTE 870.
A seminar course in which students develop advanced skills in critical analysis, academic writing and library research. Assignments include compiling and writing a review of literature related to thesis research. Students develop questions related to their area of research and professional interest to be used on their PhD comprehensive examination.
ARTE 882 Research Practice (3 credits)
A seminar course in which students conduct a small scale research project based on their own research proposal.
ARTE 883 Comprehensive Examination (no credit)
Each student must successfully complete the doctoral comprehensive examination in order to be admitted to candidacy. The comprehensive examination is composed of written and oral components.
ARTE 884 Doctoral Seminar (3 credits)
This course addresses research and communication, thesis writing, and professional practice.
ARTE 890 Research and Thesis (63 credits)
Includes thesis proposal and its approval by the Thesis Advisory Committee, Research (including any further study that may be required to gain needed expertise), written thesis and oral examination. Students are encouraged to periodically present their research-in-progress to academic and professional audiences.
The following courses are cross-listed at the MA and PhD levels:
MA
PhD
ARTE 606
ARTE 660
ARTE 670
ARTE 672
ARTE 682
ARTE 806
ARTE 850
ARTE 870
ARTE 872
ARTE 882
ARTE 606 Topics in Studio Inquiry (3 credits)
In this course students identify the content and the processes essential to their on-going studio performance. Students are expected to develop parallel inquiry into exhibitions, installations, performances, documentations, notation systems and related readings. Evaluation is based on workshop and seminar participation, studio performance and class presentations. Computer access and shared studio space are available. This course may be repeated as ARTE 607, 608, 609, 610, 611.
ARTE 660 Selected Topics in Art Education (3 credits)
A seminar course offering students the opportunity to study various aspects of art education. Specific topics vary from year to year to take advantage of the special expertise of the faculty.
ARTE 670 Critical Perspectives on Art Education History: History, Theory and Practice (3 credits)
A seminar course in which students develop critical reading and writing skills while adding to their understanding of developments past and present that have shaped the field of art education.
ARTE 672 Advanced Critical Analysis (3 credits)
Prerequisite: ARTE 670.
A seminar course in which students develop advanced skills in critical analysis, academic writing and library research. Assignments include compiling and writing a review of literature on a topic of research or professional interest.
ARTE 680 Foundations for Inquiry (3 credits)
A seminar course in which students are introduced to the basic concepts, terminology, and contexts of inquiry in art education. Students learn about the practice of systematic inquiry, including: identifying and articulating a topic or question; situating the inquiry within a theoretical framework; relating the inquiry to art education practices; and selecting appropriate inquiry procedures. Each student develops a proposal for a small-scale project related to his/her particular art education interests.
ARTE 682 Research Practice (3 credits)
Prerequisite: ARTE 680.
A seminar course in which students conduct a small-scale research project based on their own research proposal. Students are introduced to appropriate forms and practices for conducting the project and presenting the results.
ARTE 698 Thesis
The thesis topic is chosen in consultation with the thesis supervisor, and is approved by the thesis advisory committee. Students produce a thesis proposal; conduct the proposed inquiry; produce the thesis; and present it orally to their thesis advisory committee. Guidelines for the thesis are described in Thesis Preparation Guide available from the School of Graduate Studies and Art Education’s Master of Arts Thesis Procedures available from the department’s programs office.
Scholarly Thesis (24 credits)
Students develop a research based scholarly thesis in consultation with the faculty supervisor. The thesis is a minimum of 20,000 words and must address a research question or problem through an empirical or philosophical investigation. The thesis must include a discussion that documents the student’s reflections upon the methods and procedures employed, and the actual findings that resulted from an examination of the problem. The thesis culminates in a discussion of its implications for art education theory and/or practice. The thesis is presented to the advisory committee for evaluation, and for defence in an oral examination.
Studio-based Thesis (24 credits)
Students develop a cohesive body of artwork for presentation and a minimum 10,000 word written thesis component comprising a review of literature and other relevant resources, a theoretical and methodological contextualization, a critical reflection on the project and its outcomes, a linking of art making with art education and other areas of analysis as deemed necessary by the student and the student’s advisory committee. The artwork and text, together comprising the thesis, are presented to the advisory committee. Evaluation includes an oral examination on both components.
Teaching-based Thesis (24 credits)
Students organize and conduct a professional teaching project, develop a teaching dossier, and write a thesis text directly related to art education, with the guidance of the faculty supervisor. The project may be carried out on site in an educational setting or institution. In the written component of the thesis (minimum10,000 words) students document, analyze and evaluate the project, presenting a literature review, a theoretical and methodological contextualization, and a critical reflection on the project and its outcomes. Evaluation includes an oral examination on this text, on the teaching portfolio, and on the outcomes of the project.
ARTE 664 Independent Study(3 credits)
ARTE 665 Independent Study (3 credits)
The following courses are cross-listed at the MA and PhD levels:
MA
PhD
ARTE 606
ARTE 660
ARTE 670
ARTE 672
ARTE 682
ARTE 806
ARTE 850
ARTE 870
ARTE 872
ARTE 882
ARTH 610 Selected Issues in North American Art and Architectural History (3 credits)
An examination of selected issues in the production of or writing about the visual arts in North America.
ARTH 611 Industrialization and the Built Environment (3 credits)
An examination of selected aspects of the built environment when considered as more than a physical accumulation of structures.
ARTH 612 Contextualizing North American Sculpture: Topics in History, Theory and Practice (3 credits)
An examination of selected topics in the production of or writing about sculpture in North America.
ARTH 613 Special Topics in Indigenous Art and Art History (3 credits)
Selected topics pertaining to the evolving arts practices of Indigenous peoples, considering such themes as collection and exhibition, commodity, continuity, and power relationships.
ARTH 614 Issues and Topics in Craft Studies (3 credits)
Selected topics pertaining to the theory and practice of craft within a North American context.
ARTH 615 Issues in Postcolonial Theory in Art and Art History (3 credits)
Selected aspects of post-colonial and diasporic theory as they relate to North American art and art history.
ARTH 621 Collecting and Patronage in Canada (3 credits)
Investigations related to how and for whom Canadian art has been commissioned and collected.
ARTH 626 Nationhood and Identity in Canadian Art (3 credits)
ARTH 627 Feminism, Art, Art History (3 credits)
Aspects of feminism in relation to the production of art and writing about art in North America.
ARTH 633 Creative and Critical Literature in Art History (3 credits)
Aspects of the relationship between art and text, such as artists’ books, the impact of critical writing on art practice, etc.
ARTH 635 Topics in Canadian Painting (3 credits)
Selected topics pertaining to the practice of painting in Canada.
ARTH 636 Seminar in Canadian Architecture (3 credits)
Selected topics pertaining to the practice of architecture in Canada.
ARTH 638 Topics in Canadian Photography (3 credits)
Selected topics pertaining to the practice of photography in Canada.
ARTH 639 Issues in North American Architectural History (3 credits)
Selected issues pertaining to the production of or writing about architecture in North America.
ARTH 640 Issues in North American Photographic History (3 credits)
Selected issues pertaining to the production of or writing about photography in North America.
ARTH 641 Issues in Visual and Material Culture (3 credits)
Selected issues pertaining to the integration into art history of visual image/phenomena and material objects not traditionally considered to have fallen within definitions of the “fine arts”.
ARTH 642 Aspects of Media and New Media (3 credits)
Aspects of the historical development, thematic content and conceptual strategies of practices involving media and “new technologies.
ARTH 643 Topics in Art and Globalization (3 credits)
An examination of selected topics pertaining to the manner in which art has negotiated and continues to negotiate globalization.
ARTH 647 Independent Studies in North American Art History (3 credits)
ARTH 648 Aspects of Museum and Curatorial Studies: Theory (3 credits)
Aspects of the theoretical underpinnings of museum and curatorial practices.
ARTH 649 Aspects of Curatorial Practice (3 credits)
The development and application of curatorial knowledge, skills and practices as fostered through the organization of an exhibition and related events.
ARTH 650 Supervised Internship (3 credits)
Students undertake an internship at an arts organization and perform concrete tasks designed to enhance their learning through practical experience (e.g. curating an exhibition, writing a catalogue essay, editing a publication, organizing a speakers' series) and also reflect on that experience. Students have an academic supervisor as well as on-site supervision. The internship involves 150 hours of work and is approved by the academic supervisor and the graduate program director, who ensure that the tasks, learning objectives and assessments are consistent with the objectives of the MA program.
ARTH 654 Annotated Review of Sources and Documents (3 credits)
Students take this individualized study course with their supervisor, normally in the summer term following the first year of study. This course must be completed before students begin writing their thesis. Supervisor and students meet to determine the list of scholarly texts and/or archival materials to be addessed in order to strengthen the students' foundational knowledge of their designated research field and prepare them for writing the thesis.The students are responsible for a series of annotations, together with an essay that synthesizes the annotated material (total word count approximately 6000 words).
ARTH 655 Thesis Seminar (3 credits)
Prerequisite: ARTH 654.
This course is designed to introduce students to the intellectual and professional aspects of graduate school and academia, such as writing a thesis, conducting research, engaging with art historical theory and methodologies, giving a conference paper, applying for grants. Credit for this pass/fail seminar is accorded once the students have delivered their thesis presentation during the second year of the program.
ARTH 656 Thesis (24 credits)
CATS 689: Research Paper (9 credits)
OR
CATS 698: Applied Research Project with Report (6 credits) and
CATS 699: Comprehensive Exam (3 credits).
Practicum. In addition to the credit requirements, and as stipulated by the professional program approval associations (the American Art Therapy Association and the Canadian Art Therapy Association), each student must successfully complete a minimum of 800 hours (350 direct client contact hours and 450 agency hours) in the practice of art therapy, under faculty supervision, in an approved practicum setting. The program emphasizes experience with individual, group, and family formats for therapeutic interventions. Students work with different client populations during the first and second year of the practicum.
CATS 689: Research Paper. The research paper represents the formal culmination of graduate studies in creative arts therapies. This paper includes a literature review and may also include methodology, specific procedures, research population or sample, data collection and analysis, as appropriate to the topic approved by the Creative Arts Therapies Research and Ethics Committee. Students develop their proposals for submission to this Committee as a course requirement for CATS 691. The required research courses (CATS 691 and ATRP 693) aim to provide students with knowledge of specific research methodologies.
CATS 698: Applied Research Project with Report and CATS 699: Comprehensive Exam. The student chooses this project to further explore specific pilot project reports, feasibility studies and research with artistic, photographic or video documentation relevant to the creative arts therapies. All applied projects must include a written component, and be presented by each student as a public seminar upon completion. An oral/written comprehensive case study examination must be taken to demonstrate integrative aspects of learning and knowledge in the study of art therapy.
Language Requirements. While there are no formal language requirements, students intending to work in Quebec are strongly encouraged to develop a working knowledge of French.
Academic Regulations
Academic Standing. Please refer to the Academic Standing section of the Calendar for a detailed review of the Academic Regulations.
Residence. The minimum residence requirement is two years (5 terms) of full-time study, or the equivalent in part-time study.
Time Limit. Please refer to the Academic Regulation page for further details regarding the Time Limit requirements.
Graduation Requirement. In order to graduate, students must have obtained a cumulative GPA of at least 2.70.
Courses
CATS 609 Introduction to Dance/Movement Therapy (3 credits)
This course provides an introduction to the foundations and primary concepts of dance/movement therapy and explores their relevance and applications to other creative arts therapies modalities through experiential, somatic, and theoretical approaches.
CATS 610 Introduction to Topics in Clinical Psychology for Creative Arts Therapists (3 credits)
This seminar introduces creative arts therapists to the various psychopathologies, their symptomatologies, etiologies, current Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM) diagnostic criteria, and treatments.
Note: Credit received for CATS 610 cannot be applied towards a graduate program in Psychology.
CATS 611 Counselling Skills for Creative Arts Therapists (3 credits)
This course introduces basic skills and practices of counselling and psychotherapy for creative arts therapists. It provides the opportunity to explore, develop, and practice the skills required for effective therapeutic interventions across varied theoretical orientations and treatment approaches. The course focuses on the therapeutic relationship and the therapeutic frame.
CATS 615 Independent Practicum in the Creative Arts Therapies (3 credits)
Prerequisites: ATRP 613, 614.
With the Department’s approval and in agreement with a faculty supervisor, additional practicum experience is offered on an individual basis to students in special circumstances. A case study is required.
CATS 631A Selected Issues in the Creative Arts Therapies (3 credits)
This course may be repeated as CATS 631B, 631C, etc.
CATS 636 Independent Studies in Creative Arts Therapies (3 credits)
This course may be repeated as CATS 637.
CATS 638 Creative Process in Clinical Practice for Creative Arts Therapists (3 credits)
This course provides experiential learning in the clinical application of creative projection techniques through a methodology based on exploring character in myth and fairy tale. The creative process is examined through readings, discussions, masks, movement, music and drama.
CATS 639 Interdisciplinary Topics: Cross-cultural Competence in the Creative Arts Therapies (1 credit)
This course presents cross-cultural competence as an ethical obligation, providing an overview of multi-cultural counselling theory. Students explore challenges and opportunities arising in creative arts therapies clinical practice within an environment of cultural diversity as it relates to both the therapist and the client.
CATS 640 Studio Media and Practice for Creative Arts Therapists (3 credits)
Students develop skills with a variety of studio media and processes in their own creative arts discipline, while experiencing the media and creative process of an allied discipline. Commonalities and factors unique to each are examined for their potential in interdisciplinary practice.
CATS 641 Interdisciplinary Topics: Ethics in Clinical Practice in the Creative Arts Therapies (1 credit)
This course covers ethical standards and requirements for clinical practice as established by both professional mental health and creative arts therapies associations. Students become familiar with expectations of professional and personal conduct as well as models for ethical decision-making. Students also gain an understanding of their personal value systems in relation to their work as creative arts therapists and how those values may inform ethical decision-making within their clinical practice.
CATS 643 Interdisciplinary Topics: Ethics in Research in the Creative Arts Therapies (1 credit)
This course covers ethical standards and requirements for research as established by both professional mental health and creative arts therapies associations. Students become familiar with expectations of professional and personal conduct with respect to research in the field, including research protocols for both the Department of Creative Arts Therapies and Concordia University.
CATS 645 Family Systems and the Creative Arts Therapies (3 credits)
Family systems theory is introduced and specific theories and practices of family therapy are considered. Indications for the use of family therapy and its integration with the creative arts therapies are explored, as are specific methods of assessment and intervention.
CATS 689 Research Paper (9 credits)
Prerequisite: CATS 691.
The research paper is the formal culmination of graduate studies in the creative arts therapies. This paper includes a literature review, and may also include methodology, specific procedures, research population or sample, data collection and analysis, as appropriate to the topic approved by the Creative Arts Therapies Research and Ethics Committee. Students develop their proposals for this paper as a course requirement for CATS 691, to be submitted for approval to the Research and Ethics Committee in the winter term of their first year in the program. The Committee will then assign one faculty member in the Department to supervise each paper. The nine-credit component appears on the student record only once the final version of the research paper has been submitted to the Thesis Office and the Graduate Grade Activity Report Form, granting a grade of PASS, has been submitted to the Office of the Registrar.
CATS 691 Research in the Creative Arts Therapies (3 credits)
This course presents an overview of qualitative research, theory and methodology, and their application to the creative arts therapies. Students develop critical reading skills and explore ethical issues involved in research.
CATS 698 Applied Research Project with Report (6 credits)
The student chooses this option to further explore specific pilot project reports, feasibility studies and creative research designs utilizing media intrinsic to the creative arts therapies. All applied projects must include a written component and be presented as a public seminar upon completion.
CATS 699 Comprehensive Exam (3 credits)
Art Therapy Option Courses
ATRP 600 Readings in Art Therapy (3 credits)
This course provides grounding in significant schools of psychological thought and their relevance to art therapy. It also promotes advanced knowledge and understanding of the therapeutic relationship and process from a psychodynamic perspective. Studied psychotherapeutic models include: psychodynamic, object relations, humanistic, cognitive-behavioural, as well as theories of trauma.
ATRP 602 Assessment Techniques in Art Therapy (3 credits)
This course emphasizes an understanding and experience of the purpose and process of various assessments in art therapy. The theory and practice of art therapy assessment in both clinical work and research are reviewed within the context of different populations.
ATRP 603 Symbolic Imagery and Art Therapy - Studio/Workshop (3 credits)
Through experiential art workshops and readings, symbols and the symbolic/metaphoric function are examined with reference to various psychological models, including Freudian psychoanalysis, Jungian analytical psychology and Hillman’s archetypal/imaginal psychology. Students develop an understanding of art therapy methodology by exploring personal imagery.
ATRP 604 Group and Family Art Therapy (3 credits)
This course provides a dialectical, experiential and practical examination of the major approaches to group dynamics, including psychodynamic, humanistic, systemic, and theories of communication. Stages, theories and clinical applications of group art therapy processes are explored.
ATRP 613 Art Therapy Practicum Supervision I (3 credits)
In this course, students acquire skills in the implementation of the principles of psychotherapy within the practices of art therapy with a selected population. Students learn observation and assessment procedures, treatment planning, skills in establishing and maintaining the therapeutic relationship, on-going evaluation, methods of clinical documentation, and professional reporting in multidisciplinary teams. Individual and group supervision are provided. A minimum of 150 practicum hours is required.
ATRP 614 Art Therapy Practicum Supervision II (3 credits)
Prerequisite: ATRP 613.
This course is a continuation of ATRP 613. A minimum of 200 practicum hours is required.
ATRP 620 Art Therapy Advanced Clinical Skills (3 credits)
This course is designed to refine students’ clinical skills and deepen understanding of the practice of art therapy from a psychodynamic perspective. Through role-play experience and clinical discussion in a seminar format, therapeutic issues which students encounter during their fieldwork are explored.
ATRP 623 Advanced Art Therapy Practicum Supervision I (3 credits)
Prerequisites: ATRP 613, 614.
This course is designed to promote the consolidation of students’ abilities in the practice of art therapy, to further develop clinical skills, and deepen psychotherapeutic understanding. Individual and group supervision are provided. Case presentations, readings and clinical analysis of therapeutic issues are integral to this course. A minimum of 200 practicum hours is required.
ATRP 624 Advanced Art Therapy Practicum Supervision II (3 credits)
Prerequisites: ATRP 613, 614, 623.
This course is a continuation of ATRP 623. A minimum of 250 practicum hours is required.
ATRP 630 Child and Adolescent Art Therapy (3 credits)
This course promotes an understanding of the theory and practice of art therapy with children and adolescents. Clinical applications of art therapy within diverse child and adolescent populations are examined with reference to the systemic, psychodynamic and cognitive models. Appropriate use of artistic media and play techniques are studied.
ATRP 693 Research in Art Therapy (3 credits)
Prerequisite: CATS 691.
This course is designed to foster the acquisition of knowledge and methodological tools in arts-based, qualitative and quantitative methods relevant to the field of art therapy. Emphasis is placed on the use of the practical tools necessary to conduct reliable and valid research.
CATS 689: Research Paper (9 credits)
OR
CATS 698: Applied Research Project with Report (6 credits) and
CATS 699: Comprehensive Exam (3 credits).
Practicum. In addition to the credit requirements, and as stipulated by the professional program approval of the National Association for Drama Therapy, each student must successfully complete a minimum of 800 hours (350 direct client contact hours and 450 agency hours) in the practice of drama therapy, under faculty supervision, in an approved practicum setting. The program emphasizes experience with individual, group, and family formats for therapeutic interventions. Students work with different client populations during the first and second year of the practicum.
CATS 689: Research Paper. The research paper represents the formal culmination of graduate studies in the creative arts therapies. This paper includes a literature review and may also include methodology, specific procedures, research population or sample, data collection and analysis, as appropriate to the topic approved by the Creative Arts Therapies Research and Ethics Committee. Students develop their proposals for submission to this Committee as a course requirement for CATS 691. The required research courses (CATS 691 and DTHY 693) aim to provide students with knowledge of specific research methodologies.
CATS 698: Applied Research Project with Report and CATS 699: Comprehensive Exam. The student chooses this project to further explore specific pilot project reports, feasibility studies and research with performance, photographic or video documentation relevant to the creative arts therapies. All applied projects must include a written component, and be presented by each student as a public seminar upon completion. An oral/written comprehensive case study examination must be taken to demonstrate integrative aspects of learning and knowledge in the study of drama therapy.
Language Requirements. While there are no formal language requirements, students intending to work in Quebec are strongly encouraged to develop a working knowledge of French.
Academic Regulations
Academic Standing. Please refer to the Academic Standing section of the Calendar for a detailed review of the Academic Regulations.
Residence. The minimum residence requirement is two years (5 terms) of full-time study, or the equivalent in part-time study.
Time Limit. Please refer to the Academic Regulation page for further details regarding the Time Limit requirements.
Graduation Requirement. In order to graduate, students must have obtained a cumulative GPA of at least 2.70.
Courses
CATS 609 Introduction to Dance/Movement Therapy (3 credits)
This course provides an introduction to the foundations and primary concepts of dance/movement therapy and explores their relevance and applications to other creative arts therapies modalities through experiential, somatic, and theoretical approaches.
CATS 610 Introduction to Topics in Clinical Psychology for Creative Arts Therapists (3 credits)
This seminar introduces creative arts therapists to the various psychopathologies, their symptomatologies, etiologies, current Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM) diagnostic criteria, and treatments.
Note: Credit received for CATS 610 cannot be applied towards a graduate program in Psychology.
CATS 611 Counselling Skills for Creative Arts Therapists (3 credits)
This course introduces basic skills and practices of counselling and psychotherapy for creative arts therapists. It provides the opportunity to explore, develop, and practice the skills required for effective therapeutic interventions across varied theoretical orientations and treatment approaches. The course focuses on the therapeutic relationship and the therapeutic frame.
CATS 615 Independent Practicum in the Creative Arts Therapies (3 credits)
Prerequisites: ATRP 613, 614.
With the Department’s approval and in agreement with a faculty supervisor, additional practicum experience is offered on an individual basis to students in special circumstances. A case study is required.
CATS 631A Selected Issues in the Creative Arts Therapies (3 credits)
This course may be repeated as CATS 631B, 631C, etc.
CATS 636 Independent Studies in Creative Arts Therapies (3 credits)
This course may be repeated as CATS 637.
CATS 638 Creative Process in Clinical Practice for Creative Arts Therapists (3 credits)
This course provides experiential learning in the clinical application of creative projection techniques through a methodology based on exploring character in myth and fairy tale. The creative process is examined through readings, discussions, masks, movement, music and drama.
CATS 639 Interdisciplinary Topics: Cross-cultural Competence in the Creative Arts Therapies (1 credit)
This course presents cross-cultural competence as an ethical obligation, providing an overview of multi-cultural counselling theory. Students explore challenges and opportunities arising in creative arts therapies clinical practice within an environment of cultural diversity as it relates to both the therapist and the client.
CATS 640 Studio Media and Practice for Creative Arts Therapists (3 credits)
Students develop skills with a variety of studio media and processes in their own creative arts discipline, while experiencing the media and creative process of an allied discipline. Commonalities and factors unique to each are examined for their potential in interdisciplinary practice.
CATS 641 Interdisciplinary Topics: Ethics in Clinical Practice in the Creative Arts Therapies (1 credit)
This course covers ethical standards and requirements for clinical practice as established by both professional mental health and creative arts therapies associations. Students become familiar with expectations of professional and personal conduct as well as models for ethical decision-making. Students also gain an understanding of their personal value systems in relation to their work as creative arts therapists and how those values may inform ethical decision-making within their clinical practice.
CATS 643 Interdisciplinary Topics: Ethics in Research in the Creative Arts Therapies (1 credit)
This course covers ethical standards and requirements for research as established by both professional mental health and creative arts therapies associations. Students become familiar with expectations of professional and personal conduct with respect to research in the field, including research protocols for both the Department of Creative Arts Therapies and Concordia University.
CATS 645 Family Systems and the Creative Arts Therapies (3 credits)
Family systems theory is introduced and specific theories and practices of family therapy are considered. Indications for the use of family therapy and its integration with the creative arts therapies are explored, as are specific methods of assessment and intervention.
CATS 689 Research Paper (9 credits)
Prerequisite: CATS 691.
The research paper is the formal culmination of graduate studies in the creative arts therapies. This paper includes a literature review, and may also include methodology, specific procedures, research population or sample, data collection and analysis, as appropriate to the topic approved by the Creative Arts Therapies Research and Ethics Committee. Students develop their proposals for this paper as a course requirement for CATS 691, to be submitted for approval to the Research and Ethics Committee in the winter term of their first year in the program. The Committee will then assign one faculty member in the Department to supervise each paper. The nine-credit component appears on the student record only once the final version of the research paper has been submitted to the Thesis Office and the Graduate Grade Activity Report Form, granting a grade of PASS, has been submitted to the Office of the Registrar.
CATS 691 Research in the Creative Arts Therapies (3 credits)
This course presents an overview of qualitative research, theory and methodology, and their application to the creative arts therapies. Students develop critical reading skills and explore ethical issues involved in research.
CATS 698 Applied Research Project with Report (6 credits)
The student chooses this option to further explore specific pilot project reports, feasibility studies and creative research designs utilizing media intrinsic to the creative arts therapies. All applied projects must include a written component and be presented as a public seminar upon completion.
CATS 699 Comprehensive Exam (3 credits)
Drama Therapy Option Courses
DTHY 600 Current Approaches to Drama Therapy (3 credits)
This course provides grounding in significant theoretical theories of drama therapy and correlating schools of psychological thought and their relevance to drama therapy. It also promotes advanced knowledge and understanding of the therapeutic relationship and process from several drama therapy, psychodynamic, and psychotherapeutic perspectives. Studied psychotherapeutic models include: psychodynamic, object relations, humanistic, cognitive-behavioural, as well as theories of trauma. Drama therapy models include: role theory, projective techniques, therapeutic theatre, the use of story, and performance techniques.
DTHY 603 Improvisation and Drama Therapy - Studio/Workshop (3 credits)
This course focuses on developing skills in adapting methods of dramatic improvisation for the purpose of therapy, including exploration of projective, playback and psychodramatic techniques. Attention is given to the theory of distancing in terms of therapeutic process and dramatic form.
DTHY 604 Drama Therapy and Groups (3 credits)
This course provides a dialectical, experiential and practical examination of the major approaches to group dynamics, including psychodynamic, humanistic, systemic, and theories of communication. Stages, theories and clinical applications of group drama therapy processes are explored.
DTHY 613 Drama Therapy Practicum Supervision I (3 credits)
In this course, students acquire skills in the implementation of the principles of psychotherapy within the practices of drama therapy with a selected population. Students learn observation and assessment procedures, treatment planning, skills in establishing and maintaining the therapeutic relationship, on-going evaluation, methods of clinical documentation, and professional reporting in multidisciplinary teams. Individual and group supervision are provided. A minimum of 150 practicum hours is required.
DTHY 614 Drama Therapy Practicum Supervision II (3 credits)
Prerequisite: DTHY 613.
This course is a continuation of DTHY 613. A minimum of 200 practicum hours is required.
DTHY 623 Advanced Drama Therapy Practicum Supervision I (3 credits)
Prerequisites: DTHY 613, 614.
This course is designed to promote the consolidation of students’ abilities in the practice of drama therapy, to further develop clinical skills, and deepen psychotherapeutic understanding. Individual and group supervision are provided. Case presentations, readings and clinical analysis of therapeutic issues are integral to this course. A minimum of 200 practicum hours is required.
DTHY 624 Advanced Drama Therapy Practicum Supervision II (3 credits)
Prerequisites: DTHY 613, 614, 623.
This course is a continuation of DTHY 623. A minimum of 250 practicum hours is required.
DTHY 643 Sociodrama and Psychodrama (3 credits)
Sociodrama and psychodrama practices are examined for their use as treatment modalities in drama therapy. Seminars and experiential methods of instruction integrate their practice into the aims and principles of drama therapy.
DTHY 644 Child and Adolescent Drama Therapy (3 credits)
This course focuses on the methodologies, processes, and assessment techniques as they relate to drama therapy, play and play therapy with children and adolescents, and their families.
DTHY 645 Assessment in Drama Therapy (3 credits)
Prerequisite: DTHY 644.
This course explores assessment tools developed in the field of drama therapy, including those based on such dramatic media as storytelling, role-plays, puppets and masks. The theory and practice of drama therapy assessment in both clinical work and research are reviewed within the context of different populations.
DTHY 693 Research in Drama Therapy (3 credits)
Prerequisite: CATS 691.
This course is designed to foster the acquisition of knowledge and methodological tools in arts-based, qualitative and quantitative methods relevant to the field of drama therapy. Emphasis is placed on the use of the practical tools necessary to conduct reliable and valid research.
MTHY 623 and MTHY 699 (Thesis, 15 credits).
Three additional elective credits, to be chosen in consultation with an academic faculty advisor, from: MTHY 624 and MTHY 625.
Advanced music therapy practice option:
MTHY 633 (6 credits), MTHY 634 (6 credits).
Plus nine additional elective credits, to be chosen in consultation with an academic faculty advisor. With the approval of the Chair of  Creative Arts Therapies and of the cooperating department, some or all of the elective credits may be chosen from the Department of Creative Arts Therapies, other departments in the University, or other universities.
French Language Requirements. While there are no formal French proficiency requirements, students intending to work in Québec are strongly encouraged to develop a working knowledge of French.
Academic Regulations
Academic Standing. Please refer to the Academic Standing section of the Calendar for a detailed review of the Academic Regulations.
Residence. The minimum required residency is three consecutive terms full-time study or the equivalent in part-time study.
Time Limit. Please refer to the Academic Regulation page for further details regarding the Time Limit requirements. It is expected that students will normally complete the proposed program within 3 terms (1 year) of full-time study from the time of initial registration in the program.
Graduation Requirement. In order to graduate, students must have a minimum cumulative GPA of 2.70.
Courses
CATS 609 Introduction to Dance/Movement Therapy (3 credits)
This course provides an introduction to the foundations and primary concepts of dance/movement therapy and explores their relevance and applications to other creative arts therapies modalities through experiential, somatic, and theoretical approaches.
CATS 610 Introduction to Topics in Clinical Psychology for Creative Arts Therapists (3 credits)
This seminar introduces creative arts therapists to the various psychopathologies, their symptomatologies, etiologies, current Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM) diagnostic criteria, and treatments.
Note: Credit received for CATS 610 cannot be applied towards a graduate program in Psychology.
CATS 611 Counselling Skills for Creative Arts Therapists (3 credits)
This course introduces basic skills and practices of counselling and psychotherapy for creative arts therapists. It provides the opportunity to explore, develop, and practice the skills required for effective therapeutic interventions across varied theoretical orientations and treatment approaches. The course focuses on the therapeutic relationship and the therapeutic frame.
CATS 615 Independent Practicum in the Creative Arts Therapies (3 credits)
Prerequisites: ATRP 613, 614.
With the Department’s approval and in agreement with a faculty supervisor, additional practicum experience is offered on an individual basis to students in special circumstances. A case study is required.
CATS 631A Selected Issues in the Creative Arts Therapies (3 credits)
This course may be repeated as CATS 631B, 631C, etc.
CATS 636 Independent Studies in Creative Arts Therapies (3 credits)
This course may be repeated as CATS 637.
CATS 638 Creative Process in Clinical Practice for Creative Arts Therapists (3 credits)
This course provides experiential learning in the clinical application of creative projection techniques through a methodology based on exploring character in myth and fairy tale. The creative process is examined through readings, discussions, masks, movement, music and drama.
CATS 639 Interdisciplinary Topics: Cross-cultural Competence in the Creative Arts Therapies (1 credit)
This course presents cross-cultural competence as an ethical obligation, providing an overview of multi-cultural counselling theory. Students explore challenges and opportunities arising in creative arts therapies clinical practice within an environment of cultural diversity as it relates to both the therapist and the client.
CATS 640 Studio Media and Practice for Creative Arts Therapists (3 credits)
Students develop skills with a variety of studio media and processes in their own creative arts discipline, while experiencing the media and creative process of an allied discipline. Commonalities and factors unique to each are examined for their potential in interdisciplinary practice.
CATS 641 Interdisciplinary Topics: Ethics in Clinical Practice in the Creative Arts Therapies (1 credit)
This course covers ethical standards and requirements for clinical practice as established by both professional mental health and creative arts therapies associations. Students become familiar with expectations of professional and personal conduct as well as models for ethical decision-making. Students also gain an understanding of their personal value systems in relation to their work as creative arts therapists and how those values may inform ethical decision-making within their clinical practice.
CATS 643 Interdisciplinary Topics: Ethics in Research in the Creative Arts Therapies (1 credit)
This course covers ethical standards and requirements for research as established by both professional mental health and creative arts therapies associations. Students become familiar with expectations of professional and personal conduct with respect to research in the field, including research protocols for both the Department of Creative Arts Therapies and Concordia University.
CATS 645 Family Systems and the Creative Arts Therapies (3 credits)
Family systems theory is introduced and specific theories and practices of family therapy are considered. Indications for the use of family therapy and its integration with the creative arts therapies are explored, as are specific methods of assessment and intervention.
CATS 689 Research Paper (9 credits)
Prerequisite: CATS 691.
The research paper is the formal culmination of graduate studies in the creative arts therapies. This paper includes a literature review, and may also include methodology, specific procedures, research population or sample, data collection and analysis, as appropriate to the topic approved by the Creative Arts Therapies Research and Ethics Committee. Students develop their proposals for this paper as a course requirement for CATS 691, to be submitted for approval to the Research and Ethics Committee in the winter term of their first year in the program. The Committee will then assign one faculty member in the Department to supervise each paper. The nine-credit component appears on the student record only once the final version of the research paper has been submitted to the Thesis Office and the Graduate Grade Activity Report Form, granting a grade of PASS, has been submitted to the Office of the Registrar.
CATS 691 Research in the Creative Arts Therapies (3 credits)
This course presents an overview of qualitative research, theory and methodology, and their application to the creative arts therapies. Students develop critical reading skills and explore ethical issues involved in research.
CATS 698 Applied Research Project with Report (6 credits)
The student chooses this option to further explore specific pilot project reports, feasibility studies and creative research designs utilizing media intrinsic to the creative arts therapies. All applied projects must include a written component and be presented as a public seminar upon completion.
CATS 699 Comprehensive Exam (3 credits)
Music Therapy Option Courses
MTHY 600 Music Therapy Advanced Literature (3 credits)
In this course, students examine music therapy and related literature in order to deepen their understanding of the influences on their own clinical and conceptual work. Cultural, musical, and theoretical frameworks are analyzed; these include psychodynamic, humanistic, cognitive behavioural, and other frameworks. Emphasis is placed on the integration of theory and music therapy process, assessment, intervention, and evidence-based practice.
MTHY 601 Music Therapy Supervision, Teaching, and Learning (3 credits)
Examination of current theories and practices in clinical music therapy supervision and in university teaching and learning. Through lectures, demonstrations, and applied practice, students develop the necessary advanced professional competencies for clinical supervision and for excellence in teaching and learning. Topics include, but are not limited to, learning styles, teaching strategies, infusion of technology in instruction, and the creation of effective learning communities.
MTHY 602 Advanced Clinical Improvisation in Music Therapy I (1.5 credits)
This course explores the applications of clinical improvisation processes in therapy and assessment. The specific focus is determined by identified student strengths and needs, and may include Nordoff and Robbins techniques; advanced piano techniques; analytical music therapy; and others.
MTHY 603 Advanced Clinical Improvisation in Music Therapy II (1.5 credits)
Prerequisite: MTHY 602, or equivalent.
Advanced study in clinical improvisation techniques in music therapy. The specific focus is determined by the identified student experience, strengths, and needs, and may include Nordoff and Robbins techniques; advanced piano and vocal techniques; analytical music therapy; and others.
MTHY 623 Advanced Music Therapy Practicum I (3 credits)
This course offers advanced clinical experience in the students’ areas of specialization. Close individual and group supervision for students are provided. Case presentations, readings, discussion of ethical issues related to students’ work are integral to this course.
MTHY 624 Advanced Music Therapy Practicum II (3 credits)
Prerequisite: MTHY 623.
This course provides further advanced clinical experience in students’ areas of specialization. Close individual and group supervision for students are provided. Case presentations, readings, discussion of ethical issues related to students’ work are integral to this course.
MTHY 625 Guided Imagery and Music, Level I (3 credits)
This course introduces students to the Guided Imagery and Music method (GIM) through demonstrations, theoretical discussion and personal experiences. Specific topics covered include: the role of music in GIM, relaxation techniques, types of imagery and basic guiding techniques, and the implementation of GIM in assessment. This course is graded on a Pass/Fail basis.
MTHY 633 Advanced Music Therapy Practice I (6 credits)
This course offers advanced clinical experience in the students’ areas of specialization, with a required minimum of 100 placement hours. Close individual and group supervision for students are provided. Case presentations, readings, discussion of ethical issues related to students’ work are integral to this course.
MTHY 634 Advanced Music Therapy Practice II (6 credits)
Prerequisite: MTHY 633.
This course provides further advanced clinical experience in students’ areas of specialization, with a required minimum of 100 placement hours. Close individual and group supervision for students are provided. Case presentations, readings, discussion of ethical issues related to students’ work are integral to this course. As part of this capstone course in the Advanced Music Therapy Practice option, students complete a public presentation which reflects a major integration of their practical work.
MTHY 693 Research in Music Therapy: Qualitative and Quantitative Methods (3 credits)
This course is designed to foster the acquisition of knowledge and methodological tools in qualitative and quantitative methods relevant to the field of Music Therapy. Particular emphasis is placed on acquisition of the practical tools necessary to conduct reliable and valid research to prepare students for the development of future research papers/projects in Music Therapy.
MTHY 699 Thesis (15 credits)
Prerequisite: CATS 691 and MTHY 693.
The thesis topic is chosen in consultation with the thesis supervisor, and is approved by the thesis advisory committee. Students conduct an inquiry, produce the thesis, and present it orally to their thesis advisory committee. Guidelines for the thesis are described in Thesis Preparation and Thesis Examination Regulations available from the School of Graduate Studies and the Research Handbook of the Creative Arts Therapies Department.
MTHY 501 Music Therapy Skills (3 credits)
This course introduces students to basic materials, methods, and skills used to engage people in music therapy. These include improvisation, performance, leadership, group management, and appropriate repertoire/materials development for various ages and populations. Participation in varied experiences include, but are not limited to, vocal and instrumental improvisation, drumming circles, movement, melodic instruments, assistive technology, integrated arts, and songwriting
MTHY 502 Psychology of Music (2 credits)
This course provides an introduction to phenomena involving music and human behaviour, including physical, acoustical, perceptual, psychological, neuropsychological, and pedagogical aspects.
MTHY 503 Music Therapy with Adults (1 credit)
This course provides in depth coverage of music therapy clinical practice with diverse adult populations. This includes assessment techniques, intervention methods and strategies, improvisation, counselling skills, and an overview of the various populations.
MTHY 504 Music Therapy with Children and Adolescents (1 credit)
This course provides in depth coverage of music therapy clinical practice with diverse child and adolescent populations. This includes assessment techniques, intervention methods and strategies, improvisation, and an overview of the various populations.
MTHY 510 Music Therapy Practicum I (3 credits)
Co-requisite: MTHY 503.
This practicum course with adults is one in a series of practica that cumulatively fulfills the requirements of the 200-hour preclinical and the 1,000-hour supervised clinical internship requirements, as stipulated by the professional program approval associations (the Canadian Association for Music Therapy and the American Music Therapy Association). Students develop as professional music therapists within a social, political and cultural context. Students acquire skills in the implementation of the principles and practices of music therapy within adult populations, including observation and assessment procedures, treatment planning, evaluation, and reporting in multi-disciplinary team settings. Students have the opportunity to explore, develop, and integrate academic and practical knowledge and skills within a clinical setting. A minimum of 300 practicum hours is required.
MTHY 511 Music Therapy Practicum II (3 credits)
Co-requisite: MTHY 504.
This practicum course within children and adolescent populations is one in a series of practica that cumulatively fulfills the requirements of the 200-hour pre-clinical and the 1,000-hour supervised clinical internship requirements, as stipulated by the professional program approval associations (the Canadian Association for Music Therapy and the American Music Therapy Association). Students develop as professional music therapists within a social, political and cultural context. Students acquire skills in the implementation of the principles and practices of music therapy within child and adolescent populations, including observation and assessment procedures, treatment planning, evaluation, and reporting in multi-disciplinary team settings. Students have the opportunity to explore, develop, and integrate academic and practical knowledge and skills within a clinical setting. A minimum of 300 practicum hours is required.
MTHY 512 Music Therapy Practicum III (9 credits)
Prerequisites: MTHY 510 and MTHY 511.
This practicum course with diverse populations is the final in a series of practica that cumulatively fulfills the requirements of the 200-hour preclinical and the 1,000-hour supervised clinical internship requirements, as stipulated by the professional program approval associations (the Canadian Association for Music Therapy and the American Music Therapy Association). Students develop as professional music therapists within a social, political and cultural context. With a greater focus on clinical work in this practicum, students have the opportunity to specialize in a clinical population of their choice, preparing for future careers and/or graduate studies in music therapy. A minimum of 600 practicum hours is required. Students are also required to attend classes which may be offered as weekend intensives.
MTHY 521 Clinical Improvisation in Music Therapy (3 credits)
This course explores the basic applications of clinical improvisation processes in therapy and assessment. The specific focus is determined by identified student strengths and needs, and may include Nordoff and Robbins techniques, advanced piano techniques, analytical music therapy, and others.
FMST 806 Proseminar I (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Enrolment in Film and Moving Image Studies; or written permission of the Mel Hoppenheim School of Cinema.
Proseminar I is designed to give students a broad introduction to advanced film and moving image research by putting different periods, research methodologies, theories, and genres into dynamic relation. Written assignments are required as well as an oral presentation.
Note: Students who have received credit for FMST 800 may not take this course for credit.
FMST 807 Proseminar II (3 credits)
Prerequisite: FMST 806; or written permission of the Mel Hoppenheim School of Cinema.
Proseminar II is designed to give students a broad introduction to advanced film and moving image research by putting different periods, research methodologies, theories,and genres into dynamic relation. Written assignments are required as well as an oral presentation.
Note: Students who have received credit for FMST 800 may not take this course for credit.
Cluster Courses (Topics Clusters):
The specific content of the seminars in each of the four topics clusters will be decided by the doctoral program joint committee on a yearly basis, based on course proposals made by accredited faculty.
Cluster A:
FMST 801 Seminar in Film and Moving Image History (3 credits)
Advanced study and research in problems and issues related to film and moving image history and historiography. Topics for seminars in this cluster may include: Methods in Film Historiography; Methodological Aspects of Film-Archival Research; History of Film Technology; History of Film Institutions; History of Pre-Cinema and Early Cinema; History of Silent Cinema; History of Film Movements; History of Documentary Film; History of New Media.
Cluster B:
FMST 802 Seminar in Film and Moving Image Aesthetics (3 credits)
Advanced study and research in problems and issues of film aesthetics. Students examine the style associated with certain films, directors, genres, and national cinemas, or investigate film criticism and taste cultures. Topics for seminars in this cluster may include: Topics in Film Style and Form; Topics in Film Criticism; Film and the Other Arts: Topics in Aesthetic Theory; Topics in Directors; Topics in Moving Image and New Media Art: New Media Aesthetics; Performance.
Cluster C:
FMST 803 Seminar in Film and Moving Image Theory (3 credits)
Seminars in this cluster offer an in-depth investigation of a theory or a theoretical tradition in Film and Moving Image Studies. The course may focus on the work of a single theorist, or a particular approach or methodology. Topics for seminars in this cluster include: Interpretation and Hermeneutics; Reception Theory Narrative Theory; Topics in Classical Film Theory; Topics in Contemporary Film Theory; Topics in Film and Philosophy; Psychoanalysis and Film; Genre Theory; Semiotics; Topics in Cognitive Theory; Textual Analysis.
Cluster D:
FMST 804 Seminar in Film, Moving Image and Cultural Theory (3 credits)
Seminars in this cluster investigate film and the moving image from social and cultural perspectives. Topics for seminars in this cluster may include: Cinema and Modernity; Postmodernity and Globalization; Film, New Media, and Visual Culture, Queer Theory; Feminist Theory; Post-colonial Theory; Topics in Social and Political Theory; Topics in Cultural Studies, Film in the Context of Television and Consumer Culture.
Elective Courses (Joint MA/PhD seminars):
Students take a maximum of six credits of elective coursework. Students are entitled to enrol in PhD seminars that are cross-listed with MA seminars, provided they do not repeat seminars taken at Concordia during their MA degree. (Doctoral students registered in these courses will be expected to perform at PhD level).
Note: The focus of any given topics course in a given year determines the cluster to which it belongs. For example, “Topics in Cinéma Québécois” may belong to Cluster A when the focus is on historiography or it may belong to Cluster B when the course centers on aesthetic issues in Quebec cinema.
FMST 805/FMST 605 Topics in English Canadian Cinema (3 credits)
This seminar explores the spectrum of Canadian cinema and video produced in English, and features screenings of historical and contemporary works within fiction, documentary and experimental areas, and in some instances, video and television as well. The culture, political and institutional contexts of production and reception are emphasized, with textural analysis at the core.
Note: Students who have received credit for a topic in FMST 605 may not take that same topic under FMST 805 for credit.
FMST 810/FMST 610 Topics in Cinema Québécois (3 credits)
The course explores Québécois cinema culture. Emphasis is placed on the cultural and political contexts of production and reception. Topics may include the structure of the film industry in Québec, the role of the NFB and other institutions, avenues of distribution and exhibition, also particular groups of films, such as cinema direct, or on specific time periods, or the work of specific filmmakers.
Note: Students who have received credit for a topic in FMST 610 may not take that same topic under FMST 810 for credit.
FMST 815/FMST 615 Topics in European Cinema (3 credits)
This course covers topics in Russian, German, French, Italian, British, Spanish and Eastern European Cinemas. Questions of national culture, patterns of film production, distribution and reception, and aesthetic histories are covered. The course incorporates future experimental and documentary films as well as readings in specific cultural histories.
Note: Students who have received credit for a topic in FMST 615 may not take that same topic under FMST 815 for credit.
FMST 820/FMST 620 Topics in Non-European Cinema (3 credits)
This course focuses on Asian, African and South American filmmaking, film cultures and film industries, and comparative studies of issues pertinent to more than one of these cultures.
Note: Students who have received credit for a topic in FMST 620 may not take that same topic under FMST 820 for credit.
FMST 825/FMST 625 Topics in Film History (3 credits)
This course explores specific problems and methods of film historiography, and examines the practices associated with one or more of these methods. Course topics emphasize various historiographic methods and theories, problems of methodology and analysis.
Note: Students who have received credit for a topic in FMST 625 may not take that same topic under FMST 825 for credit.
FMST 830/FMST 630 Topics in Film Theory (3 credits)
This course is devoted to close readings of key tests in film theory, examining their background, intellectual histories, and analyzing their significance. Topics may concentrate on historical developments in film theory, or they may address a given method or approach.
Note: Students who have received credit for a topic in FMST 630 may not take that same topic under FMST 830 for credit.
FMST 835/FMST 635 Topics in Aesthetics and Cultural Theory (3 credits)
This course examines the broader cultural and aesthetic histories relevant to film theory and practice. These theories are studied in depth, beyond the limits of film studies, in order to situate film history and theory within other interdisciplinary perspectives. Topics may include postmodernism, modernism, philosophical aesthetics, sexual representation, Frankfurt School theory, postcolonialism, Marxism, deconstruction, and psychoanalysis.
Note: Students who have received credit for a topic in FMST 635 may not take that same topic under FMST 835 for credit.
FMST 840/FMST 640 Gender Issues in Film (3 credits)
This course provides an opportunity to contextualize a range of historical and theoretical feminist positions, and women’s film practices. Sample course topics include pornography, experimental feminist praxis, gender and race, or constructions of gender in specific historical periods or countries.
Note: Students who have received credit for a topic in FMST 640 may not take that same topic under FMST 840 for credit.
FMST 845/FMST 645 Topics in Film Genres (3 credits)
This course explores specific narrative film genres, such as the musical, the western, comedy, horror, melodrama and film noir. In each case, the history of the genre and its socio-historical dimensions is explored. Questions of genre transformation, popular mythology, cultural sources and parallel media, institutional analysis (studio practices) and spectatorship are addressed.
Note: Students who have received credit for a topic in FMST 645 may not take that same topic under FMST 845 for credit.
FMST 850/FMST 650 Topics in Experimental Film and Video (3 credits)
This course examines the history, aesthetics, theory and practice of experimental/avant-garde film and video, and may be organized around specific bodies of work, or theoretical issues such as the politics of representation, pure cinema, poetic structures, reflexivity, or documentary representation. Questions of medium specificity, modernism/postmodernism, performance art and theory, exhibition, distribution, canonization and criticism are addressed.
Note: Students who have received credit for a topic in FMST 650 may not take that same topic under FMST 850 for credit.
FMST 855 (PhD)/FMST 655 (MA) Topics in Documentary (3 credits)
Documentary history, aesthetics and theory are addressed in this course Questions of ideology, narrative and style in the context of specific groups of films are studied. Topics may relate to specific countries, histories, methods, institutions and cultural issues and methodological and theoretical problems arising from the concomitant evolution of television journalism, rapidly evolving technology, and changing patterns of exhibition and reception are examined.
Note: Students who have received credit for a topic in FMST 655 may not take that same topic under FMST 855 for credit.
FMST 860 (PhD)/FMST 660 Topics in Film Directors (3 credits)
This course examines the work of one or more specific directors from stylistic, aesthetic, cultural and historical perspectives. Directors that may be studied include Welles, Dreyer, Eisenstein, Hitchcock, Lang, Pasolini, Godard, Von Sternberg, Akermann and Arzmer, have been the foundation of extensive film studies scholarship.
Note: Students who have received credit for a topic in FMST 660 may not take that same topic under FMST 860 for credit.
FMST 865/FMST 665 Topics in Film Studies (3 credits)
From time to time, courses in topics that do not fit into any of the topics courses listed above are offered. These courses may include technical studies such as film acting, or special topics related to an instructor’s research project.
Note: Students who have received credit for a topic in FMST 665 may not take that same topic under FMST 865 for credit.
Other elective courses
FMST 870 Independent Study (3 credits)
Independent Study courses offer students opportunities to research and write about particular topics in film studies that are not covered in the courses offered in a given year. Students must propose a topic to a full-time faculty member, under whose supervision they complete the course.
FMST 880 Research Seminar (3 credits)
Film Studies faculty in the School of Cinema may organize seminars on a current research project.
Other program activities
FMST 885 Thesis Proposal (6 credits)
Once the examinations are completed students are eligible to submit their thesis proposal (it must be submitted no later than the second week of September or the third year into the program). The thesis proposal consists of a 40 to 60 page document outlining the object of study of the thesis, its objectives, the research hypothesis and the methodology that will be used or developed. A detailed bibliography will accompany the document as well as a preliminary table of contents. The thesis proposal must be defended orally before a jury consisting of the student’s supervisor and two faculty members.
FMST 887 Comprehensive Exam (3 credits)
A written comprehensive examination pertains to the candidate’s major field of research. A reading list of approximately 50 books and essays along with an appropriate and relevant filmography will be prepared by the student with the assistance of his/her supervisor.
FMST 888 Specialization Examination Essay (3 credits)
This course functions as a written case study that demonstrates the candidate’s capacity to perform critical analysis of research material and address research questions as outlined in the thesis proposal.
FMST 890 Research and Thesis (60 credits)
A major portion of the doctoral program is the planning and execution of innovative and original research under the direction of a supervisor. The doctoral thesis defence will be an oral examination conducted by a chair who shall be the Dean of Graduate Studies or a delegate.
FMST 600 Methods in Film Studies (6 credits)
FMST 605 Topics in English Canadian Cinema (3 credits)
Cross-listed: FMST 805.
This seminar explores the spectrum of Canadian cinema and video produced in English, and features screenings of historical and contemporary works within fiction, documentary and experimental areas, and in some instances, video and television as well. The culture, political and institutional contexts of production and reception are emphasized, with textural analysis at the core.
Note: Students who have received credit for a topic in FMST 605 may not take that same topic under FMST 805 for credit.
FMST 610 Topics in Cinema Québécois (3 credits)
Cross-listed: FMST 810.
The course explores Québécois cinema culture. Emphasis is placed on the cultural and political contexts of production and reception. Topics may include the structure of the film industry in Québec, the role of the NFB and other institutions, avenues of distribution and exhibition, also particular groups of films, such as cinema direct, or on specific time periods, or the work of specific filmmakers.
Note: Students who have received credit for a topic in FMST 610 may not take that same topic under FMST 810 for credit.
FMST 615 Topics in European Cinema (3 credits)
Cross-listed: FMST 815.
This course covers topics in Russian, German, French, Italian, British, Spanish and Eastern European Cinemas. Questions of national culture, patterns of film production, distribution and reception, and aesthetic histories are covered. The course incorporates future experimental and documentary films as well as readings in specific cultural histories.
Note: Students who have received credit for a topic in FMST 615 may not take that same topic under FMST 815 for credit.
FMST 620 Topics in Non-European Cinema (3 credits)
Cross-listed: FMST 820.
This course focuses on Asian, African and South American filmmaking, film cultures and film industries, and comparative studies of issues pertinent to more than one of these cultures.
Note: Students who have received credit for a topic in FMST 620 may not take that same topic under FMST 820 for credit.
FMST 625 Topics in Film History (3 credits)
Cross-listed: FMST 825.
This course explores specific problems and methods of film historiography, and examines the practices associated with one or more of these methods. Course topics emphasize various historiographic methods and theories, problems of methodology and analysis.
Note: Students who have received credit for a topic in FMST 625 may not take that same topic under FMST 825 for credit.
FMST 630 Topics in Film Theory (3 credits)
Cross-listed: FMST 830.
This course is devoted to close readings of key tests in film theory, examining their background, intellectual histories, and analyzing their significance. Topics may concentrate on historical developments in film theory, or they may address a given method or approach.
Note: Students who have received credit for a topic in FMST 630 may not take that same topic under FMST 830 for credit.
FMST 635 Topics in Aesthetics and Cultural Theory (3 credits)
Cross-listed: FMST 835.
This course examines the broader cultural and aesthetic histories relevant to film theory and practice. These theories are studied in depth, beyond the limits of film studies, in order to situate film history and theory within other interdisciplinary perspectives. Topics may include postmodernism, modernism, philosophical aesthetics, sexual representation, Frankfurt School theory, postcolonialism, Marxism, deconstruction, and psychoanalysis.
Note: Students who have received credit for a topic in FMST 635 may not take that same topic under FMST 835 for credit.
FMST 640 Gender Issues in Film (3 credits)
Cross-listed: FMST 840.
This course provides an opportunity to contextualize a range of historical and theoretical feminist positions, and women’s film practices. Sample course topics include pornography, experimental feminist praxis, gender and race, or constructions of gender in specific historical periods or countries.
Note: Students who have received credit for a topic in FMST 640 may not take that same topic under FMST 840 for credit.
FMST 645 Topics in Film Genres (3 credits)
Cross-listed: FMST 845.
This course explores specific narrative film genres, such as the musical, the western, comedy, horror, melodrama and film noir. In each case, the history of the genre and its socio-historical dimensions is explored. Questions of genre transformation, popular mythology, cultural sources and parallel media, institutional analysis (studio practices) and spectatorship are addressed.
Note: Students who have received credit for a topic in FMST 645 may not take that same topic under FMST 845 for credit.
FMST 650 Topics in Experimental Film and Video (3 credits)
Cross-listed: FMST 850.
This course examines the history, aesthetics, theory and practice of experimental/avant-garde film and video, and may be organized around specific bodies of work, or theoretical issues such as the politics of representation, pure cinema, poetic structures, reflexivity, or documentary representation. Questions of medium specificity, modernism/postmodernism, performance art and theory, exhibition, distribution, canonization and criticism are addressed.
Note: Students who have received credit for a topic in FMST 650 may not take that same topic under FMST 850 for credit.
FMST 655 Topics in Documentary (MA) (3 credits)
Cross-listed: FMST 855.
Documentary history, aesthetics and theory are addressed in this course Questions of ideology, narrative and style in the context of specific groups of films are studied. Topics may relate to specific countries, histories, methods, institutions and cultural issues and methodological and theoretical problems arising from the concomitant evolution of television journalism, rapidly evolving technology, and changing patterns of exhibition and reception are examined.
Note: Students who have received credit for a topic in FMST 655 may not take that same topic under FMST 855 for credit.
FMST 660 Topics in Film Directors (3 credits)
Cross-listed: FMST 860.
This course examines the work of one or more specific directors from stylistic, aesthetic, cultural and historical perspectives. Directors that may be studied include Welles, Dreyer, Eisenstein, Hitchcock, Lang, Pasolini, Godard, Von Sternberg, Akermann and Arzmer, have been the foundation of extensive film studies scholarship.
Note: Students who have received credit for a topic in FMST 660 may not take that same topic under FMST 860 for credit.
FMST 665 Topics in Film Studies (3 credits)
Cross-listed: FMST 865.
From time to time, courses in topics that do not fit into any of the topics courses listed above are offered. These courses may include technical studies such as film acting, or special topics related to an instructor’s research project.
Note: Students who have received credit for a topic in FMST 665 may not take that same topic under FMST 865 for credit.
FMST 670 Independent Study (3 credits)
FMST 675 Practicum (3 credits)
FMST 680 Practicum (3 credits)
FMST 685 Practicum (6 credits)
FMST 690 MA Research and Thesis (27 credits)
CERA 610 Ceramics I (6 credits)
A studio course providing an opportunity for intense investigation into a broad range of issues in ceramics and other disciplines. Under the supervision of a professor the structure of the course allows each participant to pursue independent interests.
CERA 611 Ceramics II (6 credits)
A continuation of CERA 610.
CERA 612 Ceramics III (6 credits)
A continuation of CERA 611.
CERA 613 Ceramics IV (6 credits)
A continuation of CERA 612.
FMPR 610 Film Production I (6 credits)
A studio course providing an opportunity to do advanced work in aesthetic and technical aspects of filmmaking with an emphasis on independent production.
FMPR 611 Film Production II (6 credits)
A continuation of FMPR 610.
FMPR 612 Film Production III (6 credits)
A continuation of FMPR 611.
FMPR 613 Film Production IV (6 credits)
A continuation of FMPR 612.
FBRS 610 Fibres and Material Practices I (6 credits)
A studio course providing an opportunity for intense investigation in fibres and material practices as well as other disciplines. Under the supervision of a professor, the structure of the course allows each student to pursue independent interests.
FBRS 611 Fibres and Material Practices II (6 credits)
A continuation of FBRS 610.
FBRS 612 Fibres and Material Practices III (6 credits)
A continuation of FBRS 611.
FBRS 613 Fibres and Material Practices IV (6 credits)
A continuation of FBRS 612.
IMCA 610 Intermedia (Video, Performance and Electronic Arts) I (6 credits)
A studio course providing an opportunity for intense investigation in video, performance and electronic arts, as well as other disciplines. Under the supervision of a faculty member, the structure of the course allows each participant to pursue independent studio practice.
Note: Students who have received credit for OPME 610 may not take this course for credit.
IMCA 611 Intermedia (Video, Performance and Electronic Arts) II (6 credits)
A continuation of IMCA 610.
Note: Students who have received credit for OPME 611 may not take this course for credit.
IMCA 612 Intermedia (Video, Performance and Electronic Arts) III (6 credits)
A continuation of IMCA 611.
Note: Students who have received credit for OPME 612 may not take this course for credit.
IMCA 613 Intermedia (Video, Performance and Electronic Arts) IV (6 credits)
A continuation of IMCA 612.
Note: Students who have received credit for OPME 613 may not take this course for credit.
PTNG 610 Painting I (6 credits)
A studio course providing opportunity for intense investigation into a wide range of approaches to painting. Under the supervision of a professor the structure of the course allows each student to pursue individual interests in painting.
PTNG 611 Painting II (6 credits)
A continuation of PTNG 610.
PTNG 612 Painting III (6 credits)
A continuation of PTNG 611.
PTNG 613 Painting IV (6 credits)
A continuation of PTNG 612.
PHOT 610 Photography I (6 credits)
A studio course providing investigation into a broadly defined concept of photography. Under the supervision of a professor each student pursues independent studio practice.
PHOT 611 Photography II (6 credits)
A continuation of PHOT 610.
PHOT 612 Photography III (6 credits)
A continuation of PHOT 611.
PHOT 613 Photography IV (6 credits)
A continuation of PHOT 612.
PRIN 610 Print Media I (6 credits)
A studio course providing intense investigation of the technical and theoretical concerns of diverse forms of print media. Under the supervision of a professor, each student pursues independent studio practice.
PRIN 611 Print Media II (6 credits)
A continuation of PRIN 610.
PRIN 612 Print Media III (6 credits)
A continuation of PRIN 611.
PRIN 613 Print Media IV (6 credits)
A continuation of PRIN 612.
SCUL 610 Sculpture I (6 credits)
A studio course offering the opportunity for intense investigation into the formation of visual and material culture in art. Under the supervision of a professor each student may pursue independent studio practice.
SCUL 611 Sculpture II (6 credits)
A continuation of SCUL 610.
SCUL 612 Sculpture III (6 credits)
A continuation of SCUL 611.
SCUL 613 Sculpture IV (6 credits)
A continuation of SCUL 612.
DISP 615 Directed Studio Practice (3 credits)
Under the guidance of an instructor, students will pursue a directed studio practice.
Seminars
ASEM 620 Art: Ideas and Practices (3 credits)
This seminar addresses the relationship between theory and studio practice. Professional and practical issues facing the artist will be discussed.
ASEM 641 Seminar in Contemporary Art (6 credits)
This course addresses issues which situate and inform artists and their work.
ASEM 642 Seminar in Contemporary Art (3 credits)
This course addresses issues which situate and inform artists and their work.
ASEM 643 Special Topics in Art and Ideology (6 credits)
Special topics will address a variety of issues that are factors in the making, presentation and the situating of art in society.
ASEM 644 Special Topics In Art and Ideology (3 credits)
Special topics will address a variety of issues that are factors in the making, presentation and the situating of art in society.
ASEM 645 Special Topics in Art and Culture (6 credits)
Topics are drawn from a variety of discourses to address the construction of identity in contemporary art and society.
ASEM 646 Special Topics in Art and Culture (3 credits)
Topics are drawn from a variety of discourses to address the construction of identity in contemporary art and society.
ASEM 651 Special Topics in Media Arts (6 credits)
Topics may address a wide range of critical fields related to media art practices, examining both conventional and non-traditional artworks such as performance, audio, video, and computer art, as well as other media.
ASEM 652 Special Topics in Media Arts (3 credits)
Topics may address a wide range of critical fields related to media art practices, examining both conventional and non-traditional artworks such as performance, audio, video, and computer art, as well as other media.
ASEM 653 Aspects of Contemporary Cinema (6 credits)
This seminar examines critical issues in contemporary cinema.
ASEM 654 Aspects of Contemporary Cinema (3 credits)
This seminar examines critical issues in contemporary cinema.
Internship and Independent Study
INTP 660 Professional Internship (6 credits)
Prerequisite: 21 credits completed in the MFA Program. Internship proposal must be supported by a full-time faculty member and approved with written permission by the MFA Graduate Program Director.
Under the joint supervision of a qualified professional and a full-time faculty member the student will be employed within industry, or by a professional organization or other relevant affiliation. Assessment is based upon a required paper, contributions to supervisory sessions and the successful completion of the internship (300 hours).
INTP 661 Professional Internship I (3 credits)
Prerequisite: 21 credits completed in the MFA Program. Internship proposal must be supported by a full-time faculty member and approved with written permission by the MFA Graduate Program Director.
Under the joint supervision of a qualified professional and a full-time faculty member the student will be employed within industry, or by a professional organization or other relevant affiliation. Assessment is based upon a required paper, contributions to supervisory sessions and the successful completion of the internship (150 hours).
INTP 662 Professional Internship II (3 credits)
Prerequisite: 21 credits completed in the MFA Program. Internship proposal must be supported by a full-time faculty member and approved with written permission by the MFA Graduate Program Director.
Under the joint supervision of a qualified professional and a full-time faculty member the student will be employed within industry, or by a professional organization or other relevant affiliation. Assessment is based upon a required paper, contributions to supervisory sessions and the successful completion of the internship (150 hours).
INDS 670 Independent Study (6 credits)
Prerequisite: 21 credits completed in the MFA Program. Independent study proposal must be supported by a full-time faculty supervisor and approved with written permission by the MFA Graduate Program Director.
The student explores a specific field or topic relevant to their area of study.
INDS 671 Independent Study I (3 credits)
Prerequisite: 21 credits completed in the MFA Program. Independent study proposal must be supported by a full-time faculty supervisor and approved with written permission by the MFA Graduate Program Director.
The student explores a specific field or topic relevant to their area of study.
INDS 672 Independent Study II (3 credits)
Prerequisite: 21 credits completed in the MFA Program. Independent study proposal must be supported by a full-time faculty supervisor and approved with written permission by the MFA Graduate Program Director.
The student explores a specific field or topic relevant to their area of study.
Studio Project and Examination
PROJ 691 Studio Project (9 credits)
With the guidance of a faculty advisor, students prepare work leading to an exhibition or film project.
PROJ 692 Exhibition or Film Project (3 credits)
Following the successful completion of the Studio Project, the student prepares a professional-level presentation within a public forum (gallery, screening room, etc.) accompanied by an artist’s statement. The candidate meets with an Examination Committee to describe the evolution of the work and to situate it in the context of current practice and theory. The Committee will question the student and determine whether or not to recommend that the student be awarded the MFA degree.
CPTP 501 Connections (3 credits)
Through discussion, readings and papers, students explore ways in which designers and production personnel can participate, collaborate and contribute as full partners in the creation of live performance. Counter-intuitive links are explored in the creation of vibrant and chaotically dynamic works.
CPTP 502 The Art of Proficiency (3 credits)
This seminar focuses on describing the connection between imagination and the production-based realities associated with live performance. Through the analysis of various aspects of production, students look at ways of bridging the gap between inspiration, imagination and originality and their practical application within all aspects of production.
CPTP 503 Aspects of Visual, Aural and Performing Arts (3 credits)
This seminar helps the student develop new perspectives by dealing with the fusion between the student’s present practice and other art forms. Throughout the semester, students meet various practicing artists in their work environment or as guest speakers at the university.
CPTP 511 Practical Study I (3 credits)
Under faculty supervision and based on their previous experience or areas of study, students learn how to apply a large number of creative and practical techniques from a chosen discipline towards achieving a cohesive artistic goal as dictated by current practices in the performing and related live arts. These individual projects must be selected in consultation with the program advisor and approved by the program director.
CPTP 512 Practical Study II (3 credits)
Under faculty supervision and based on their previous experience or areas of study, students expand their language and discourse in the performing arts, focusing on communication and collaboration, while marrying the philosophical and the theoretical with the practical. These individual projects must be selected in consultation with the program advisor and approved by the program director.
CPTP 513 Practical Study III (3 credits)
Under faculty supervision and based on their previous experience or areas of study, this practical study prepares the students both artistically and practically, deepening their insight into the theoretical and practical universes supporting live performance, whether within well-established and traditional artistic disciplines or within innovative and new methods of creation. These individual projects must be selected in consultation with the program advisor and approved by the program director.
CPTP 514 Practical Study IV (3 credits)
Under faculty supervision and based on their previous experience or areas of study, students work alongside professional artists either within the university or in a well-established artistic institution. Students are then given immediate ‘hands on’ access to various aspects of production development, construction and staging processes associated with the most current industry expectation and practice. These individual projects must be selected in consultation with the program advisor and approved by the program director.
CPTP 515 Independent Study (3 credits)
An Independent Study proposal must be supported by a full-time faculty supervisor and approved by and with written permission from the program director (in consultation with the coordinating committee). The student generates a topic to be explored from a specific field relevant to their area of study.
CPTP 598 Special Topics in Creative Practices in Technical Production (3 credits)
Topics may address a wide range of critical fields related to technical production for live performance examining both conventional and non-traditional approaches to dance, music, theatre, as well as other performance or media arts. Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Change in content will be indicated by the letter following the number (i.e. CPTP 598A, CPTP 598B etc.)
AMPS 501 Seminar - Workshop in Performance Skills (3 credits)
(This course may be repeated as AMPS 502)
An intensive developmental course for individual and group performance. A broad range of subjects will be explored including practice methods, effective rehearsing, repertoire research, program-building, memorization, improvisation, and approaching auditions and competitions.
AMPS 503 String Seminar (3 credits)
(This course may be repeated as AMPS 504)
This course examines specific aspects of performance and repertoire studies for stringed instruments.
AMPS 505 Piano Seminar (3 credits)
(This course may be repeated as AMPS 506)
This course examines specific aspects of performance and repertoire studies for piano.
AMPS 507 Voice Seminar (3 credits)
(This course may be repeated as AMPS 508)
This course examines specific aspects of performance and repertoire studies for voice.
AMPS 509 Organ and Harpsichord Seminar (3 credits)
(This course may be repeated as AMPS 510)
This course examines specific aspects of performance and repertoire studies for organ and harpsichord.
AMPS 511 Chamber Ensembles (3 credits)
(This course may be repeated as AMPS 512)
Ensembles work intensively on preparation and presentation of public performances or competitions.
AMPS 513 Orchestra (3 credits)
(This course may be repeated as AMPS 514)
Preparation and public performance with orchestra of one or several works as soloist or principal player.
AMPS 515 Performance Practices (3 credits)
(This course may be repeated as AMPS 516)
Individual projects in particular aspects of performance practice such as basso continuo, ornamentation, the cadenza, contemporary performance techniques, improvisation.
AMPS 517 Special Project in Music (3 credits)
(This course may be repeated as AMPS 518)
Individual projects in music theory, analysis, composition, aesthetics, music history, or inter-disciplinary studies connected with music.
AMPS 519 Recording Production (3 credits)
An audio recording is made in partnership with an advanced recording student. The performer works with an advanced recording student to experiment with various sound recording possibilities, placement and type of microphones, creation of resonance, ambience, “honesty” vs. enhancement, etc. involving several sessions which could include listening to recordings the performer particularly enjoys or dislikes. The advanced recording student is responsible for producing a high-quality digitally edited recording (DAT or CD-R).
AMPS 520 Recital I (6 credits)
AMPS 521 Private Instrumental or Vocal Instruction I (3 credits)
Note: This is a full year course.
AMPS 530 Recital II (6 credits)
AMPS 531 Private Instrumental or Vocal Instruction II (3 credits)
Note: This is a full year course.
AMPS 598 Special Topics in Music Performance Studies (3 credits)
AMPS 599 Special Topics in Music Performance Studies (6 credits)
CPTP 501 Connections (3 credits)
Through discussion, readings and papers, students explore ways in which designers and production personnel can participate, collaborate and contribute as full partners in the creation of live performance. Counter-intuitive links are explored in the creation of vibrant and chaotically dynamic works.
CPTP 502 The Art of Proficiency (3 credits)
This seminar focuses on describing the connection between imagination and the production-based realities associated with live performance. Through the analysis of various aspects of production, students look at ways of bridging the gap between inspiration, imagination and originality and their practical application within all aspects of production.
CPTP 503 Aspects of Visual, Aural and Performing Arts (3 credits)
This seminar helps the student develop new perspectives by dealing with the fusion between the student’s present practice and other art forms. Throughout the semester, students meet various practicing artists in their work environment or as guest speakers at the university.
CPTP 511 Practical Study I (3 credits)
Under faculty supervision and based on their previous experience or areas of study, students learn how to apply a large number of creative and practical techniques from a chosen discipline towards achieving a cohesive artistic goal as dictated by current practices in the performing and related live arts. These individual projects must be selected in consultation with the program advisor and approved by the program director.
CPTP 512 Practical Study II (3 credits)
Under faculty supervision and based on their previous experience or areas of study, students expand their language and discourse in the performing arts, focusing on communication and collaboration, while marrying the philosophical and the theoretical with the practical. These individual projects must be selected in consultation with the program advisor and approved by the program director.
CPTP 513 Practical Study III (3 credits)
Under faculty supervision and based on their previous experience or areas of study, this practical study prepares the students both artistically and practically, deepening their insight into the theoretical and practical universes supporting live performance, whether within well-established and traditional artistic disciplines or within innovative and new methods of creation. These individual projects must be selected in consultation with the program advisor and approved by the program director.
CPTP 514 Practical Study IV (3 credits)
Under faculty supervision and based on their previous experience or areas of study, students work alongside professional artists either within the university or in a well-established artistic institution. Students are then given immediate ‘hands on’ access to various aspects of production development, construction and staging processes associated with the most current industry expectation and practice. These individual projects must be selected in consultation with the program advisor and approved by the program director.
CPTP 515 Independent Study (3 credits)
An Independent Study proposal must be supported by a full-time faculty supervisor and approved by and with written permission from the program director (in consultation with the coordinating committee). The student generates a topic to be explored from a specific field relevant to their area of study.
CPTP 598 Special Topics in Creative Practices in Technical Production (3 credits)
Topics may address a wide range of critical fields related to technical production for live performance examining both conventional and non-traditional approaches to dance, music, theatre, as well as other performance or media arts. Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Change in content will be indicated by the letter following the number (i.e. CPTP 598A, CPTP 598B etc.)
DART 600 Design Theory/Practice I (3 credits)
This seminar develops a framework of practice-based and theoretical approaches that build the foundation of contemporary critical design practice and study. Drawing on examples and readings from a range of disciplines, students will explore design as a product, a practice, and a mode of social communication and investigate the cultural and discursive context in which design resides. The course will integrate the three program streams, namely visual communication, the built environment, and interaction design, and address the theme of sustainability as a timely concern for design practice.
DART 601 Research Methods in Design (3 credits)
This course introduces students to a range of methodologies and strategies used to conduct research in design. Students will be exposed to the relationship that exists between research as a practice-based activity and research as theory-based inquiry and will have the opportunity to engage in the research process through studio work, writing, and presentations.
DART 610 Design Theory/Practice II (3 credits)
Prerequisites: DART 600 and DART 601.
Through a combination of studio work, seminar discussions, workshops, and individual writings, students situate their work in different contexts, such as commercial, public, or domestic environments, and explore new venues for dissemination. Such investigations enhance students’ ability to contextualize, articulate, and exhibit the thesis work.
DART 611 Interdisciplinary Practices in Design (3 credits)
Prerequisites: DART 600 and DART 601.
This seminar examines the question of how knowledge is produced and transferred through interdisciplinary design and scholarly practices. Topics include socio-cultural, environmental and economic sustainability, participatory design, collaborative methods, communities of practice, epistemic cultures, embodiment, and knowledge production. Readings will be drawn from a broad range of disciplines.
DART 620 Graduate Colloquium (3 credits)
Prerequisites: DART 610 and DART 611.
The Graduate Colloquium will foster a community of practice and research by exposing the students to a diversity of work and methods and developing understanding of disciplinary commonalities and differences. Through this colloquium series, presentations by students will be augmented with presentations by faculty, visiting researchers, and practicing designers.
DART 630 Special Topics in Sustainability (3 credits)
Topics may address a range of critical perspectives related to sustainability in terms of the environmental triad of ecological, socio-cultural and economic foci. Sustainable practice can refer to specific technical or scientific fields but also has a broader connotation towards integrative and enduring practices.
DART 631 Special Topics in Visual Communication (3 credits)
Topics may address a range of critical perspectives related to the use of signs, icons, and visual symbols to convey ideas and communicate information. This includes graphic design, typography, illustration, and photography, as well as applications in information design, wayfinding, advertising, packaging, and electronic media.
DART 632 Special Topics in the Built Environment (3 credits)
Topics may address a range of critical perspectives related to the structures, landscapes and spaces, both physical and virtual, in relation to the actions and activities that take place in them over time. This can include large-scale city planning, the design and conceptualization of living and workspaces, and the scale of object that are embedded in those spaces.
DART 633 Special Topics in Interaction Design (3 credits)
Topics may address a range of critical perspectives related to the behaviour of an object or system in relation to its users or participants. Interaction design refers to design practices that embed electronics and computing capabilities into objects, materials, and devices, and it also describes the ways in which systems and processes produce form and structure over time.
DART 634 Special Topics in Contemporary Indigenous Art and Design (3 credits)
Topics may address a range of critical perspectives on contemporary Indigenous art and design in terms of the aesthetic, political, and cultural issues such work illuminates. The course focuses on digital media but may encompass other forms of Indigenous creative practice, including visual arts, performance, and writing.
DART 635 Special Topics in Design Research (3 credits)
Topics may address a range of critical perspectives relevant to the evolution of design research.
DART 651 Directed Study I (3 credits)
Prerequisites: Nine credits completed in the Master of Design program; written permission of any faculty member of the Thesis Advisory Committee and the Graduate Program Director; a cumulative GPA of 3.70 or higher. Students may enrol in a directed study under faculty supervision in order to undertake a specialized study of theoretical or research-creation related topics.
DART 652 Directed Study II (3 credits)
Prerequisites: DART 651; written permission of any faculty member of the Thesis Advisory Committee and the Graduate Program Director; a cumulative GPA of 3.70 or higher. Students may enrol in a directed study under faculty supervision in order to undertake a specialized study of theoretical or research-creation related topics.
DART 671 Professional Internship I (3 credits)
Prerequisites: Nine credits completed in the Master of Design program; a cumulative GPA of 3.70 or higher; a clearly defined written agreement between the student intern and the employer; written permission of any faculty member of the Thesis Advisory Committee and the Graduate Program Director. This course provides an opportunity for students to further develop their design research in a design firm, cultural organization or residency.
DART 672 Professional Internship II (3 credits)
Prerequisites: DART 671; a cumulative GPA of 3.70 or higher; a clearly defined written agreement between the student intern and the employer; written permission of any faculty member of the Thesis Advisory Committee and the Graduate Program Director. This course provides an opportunity for students to further develop their design research in a design firm, cultural organization or residency.
DART 690 Master’s Research and Thesis (24 credits)
Prerequisites: DART 610 and DART 611.
The Master’s Research and Thesis will combine a body of work or practice-led research with a written thesis document of 40-55 pages that contextualizes the practice historically and theoretically and reflects critically on the process and production. A formal oral defense and a final public exhibition of the work or practice-led research are required.
DART 500 Individual Research Project (6 credits)
Students will have the opportunity to research the application of digital design in one or two of the following areas of concentration, under the direction of a full-time faculty advisor.
Design for Print Media
Student research projects will explore aspects of digitally-generated print media. Projects can be undertaken in experimental and applied image, in graphic design, typography, font exploration and generation, packaging book works and posters.
Applied and Experimental 3D Object Making
Student research projects will involve the design of three-dimensional objects, space and environments. This design option integrates the learning of computer software for 3D modeling, rendering and animation programs, computer aided design (CAD), computer aided machining (CAM) programs for plotting, rapid prototyping for block and concept modeling and using a 3D scanner to measure existing objects for computer input.
Interactive Media
Student research projects will investigate screen-based digital design and interactive systems. These will include websites, animation, the design of virtual spaces, interactive desktop presentations and visual navigation systems, the design and interface of virtual communities, distance learning and CD ROM based interactive educational and cultural projects, and web based national and international exchange opportunities.
Inter-media and Hybrid Practice
Student research projects will focus on digital integration or hybrid practices including social design or art interventions, installations, exhibitions, compilation works that use cross-discipline means of expression, and include the integration of digital technology into the process or final production.
Theoretical Investigations in Design Art
Student research projects will be used to investigate the theoretical constructs and discourse relating to the impact of digital technologies in art and design. This will also include the application of digital technologies for appropriate pedagogies and the development of innovative teaching methodology.
DART 502 Language, Politics, Manifestos - Reading Seminar (3 credits)
The readings in this seminar will examine the ethical responsibilities, social impact, and cultural consequences of the new technologies in design art practice. The course will identify, situate and develop a language for dialogue and discourse. The issues considered will be on design ecology and ethics, gender polarization and biases, political strategies in the public sphere, and essential declarations of the digital era, in present and future technological environments.
DART 503 Theories of Interactivity (3 credits)
This course will explore the new opportunities designers have to fundamentally change the ways in which information is organized, manipulated and disseminated in the context of new communications technologies. The computer, as a medium for expression, will be explored through issues of cognition, metaphor, narrative structures, the creation of three dimensional objects and environments, symbolic interaction, information architecture and interactive visual navigational systems.
DART 504 Contextualizing Design Practice (3 credits)
This course approaches design and digital technologies through interdisciplinary theoretical engagement to investigate the cultural and discursive context in which design resides. Through a combination of seminar discussions, workshops, and individual writings, students situate their work in different environments, such as commercial, public or domestic contexts, and explore new venues of dissemination. Such investigations enhance students’ ability to contextualize, articulate and exhibit the thesis work.
DART 510 Independent Study (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Written permission of the Graduate Program Director.
Independent study proposals must be supported by a full-time faculty supervisor and approved with written permission by the Graduate Program Director. The student undertakes research in a specific field or topic relevant to their area of study.
CPTP 501 Connections (3 credits)
Through discussion, readings and papers, students explore ways in which designers and production personnel can participate, collaborate and contribute as full partners in the creation of live performance. Counter-intuitive links are explored in the creation of vibrant and chaotically dynamic works.
CPTP 502 The Art of Proficiency (3 credits)
This seminar focuses on describing the connection between imagination and the production-based realities associated with live performance. Through the analysis of various aspects of production, students look at ways of bridging the gap between inspiration, imagination and originality and their practical application within all aspects of production.
CPTP 503 Aspects of Visual, Aural and Performing Arts (3 credits)
This seminar helps the student develop new perspectives by dealing with the fusion between the student’s present practice and other art forms. Throughout the semester, students meet various practicing artists in their work environment or as guest speakers at the university.
CPTP 511 Practical Study I (3 credits)
Under faculty supervision and based on their previous experience or areas of study, students learn how to apply a large number of creative and practical techniques from a chosen discipline towards achieving a cohesive artistic goal as dictated by current practices in the performing and related live arts. These individual projects must be selected in consultation with the program advisor and approved by the program director.
CPTP 512 Practical Study II (3 credits)
Under faculty supervision and based on their previous experience or areas of study, students expand their language and discourse in the performing arts, focusing on communication and collaboration, while marrying the philosophical and the theoretical with the practical. These individual projects must be selected in consultation with the program advisor and approved by the program director.
CPTP 513 Practical Study III (3 credits)
Under faculty supervision and based on their previous experience or areas of study, this practical study prepares the students both artistically and practically, deepening their insight into the theoretical and practical universes supporting live performance, whether within well-established and traditional artistic disciplines or within innovative and new methods of creation. These individual projects must be selected in consultation with the program advisor and approved by the program director.
CPTP 514 Practical Study IV (3 credits)
Under faculty supervision and based on their previous experience or areas of study, students work alongside professional artists either within the university or in a well-established artistic institution. Students are then given immediate ‘hands on’ access to various aspects of production development, construction and staging processes associated with the most current industry expectation and practice. These individual projects must be selected in consultation with the program advisor and approved by the program director.
CPTP 515 Independent Study (3 credits)
An Independent Study proposal must be supported by a full-time faculty supervisor and approved by and with written permission from the program director (in consultation with the coordinating committee). The student generates a topic to be explored from a specific field relevant to their area of study.
CPTP 598 Special Topics in Creative Practices in Technical Production (3 credits)
Topics may address a wide range of critical fields related to technical production for live performance examining both conventional and non-traditional approaches to dance, music, theatre, as well as other performance or media arts. Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Change in content will be indicated by the letter following the number (i.e. CPTP 598A, CPTP 598B etc.)
MSCA 602 Applied Linear Statistical Models (3 credits) *
MSCA 683 Applied Multivariate Data Analysis (3 credits) *
* May not be required depending on previous studies.
Phase II (Required Courses)
ADMI 870 Research Methodology in Management or approved equivalent (3 credits)
ADMI 880 Pedagogical Methods or approved equivalent (3 credits)
ADMI 889 Comprehensive Examinations (6 credits)
Phase II (Elective Courses) Minimum of 4 courses (12 credits) in the area of specialization plus 1 additional course (3 credits)
Elective courses offered in the following disciplines vary in content from term to term and from year to year. All seminars are 3 credits.
ADMI 800-809 Business Economics
ADMI 810-819 Organizational Behaviour
ADMI 820-829 Decision Sciences and Management Information Systems
ADMI 830-839 Marketing
ADMI 840-849 Finance
ADMI 850-859 Business Policy and Strategy
ADMI 860-869 Accountancy and Control
Phase III (Thesis)
ADMI 890 Thesis (60 credits)
MSCA 699 Research Thesis (21 credits)
The MSc thesis is intended to provide candidates with an opportunity to carry out an investigation in-depth in a particular area of interest and to make a contribution to knowledge in the area. It is expected that the thesis will include a comprehensive and critical synthesis of the relevant literature and will also embody either a theoretical contribution to knowledge, a rigorous empirical investigation or both.
A Thesis Committee consists of a faculty member from the department as supervisor and two other faculty members. An Examining Committee consists of the Thesis Committee and a Thesis Examination Chair appointed by the Associate Dean, Research and Research Programs in accordance with the thesis regulations specified in the relevant section of this calendar.
Seminar Descriptions
MSCA 602 Applied Linear Statistical Models
The course focuses on systematic treatments of linear statistical models for regression, analysis of variance and experimental design with special emphasis on applications in business and economics. Topics include regression analysis: inference, model building, diagnostics, remedial measures and validation; single-factor and two-factor ANOVA models, and analysis of covariance. Other statistical tools for specialized applications discussed may include logistic regression, path analysis and time series regression. Case studies are employed to illustrate tools for fitting, checking, validating and interpreting linear models.
MSCA 615 Research Methodology - Administrative Sciences
This seminar provides a basic understanding of the research process and a knowledge of the methods used in the design and execution of scientific research relevant to social sciences, and specifically the business context. The seminar helps students to develop skills needed to assess the feasibility and potential contribution of proposed studies, and to critically evaluate research reported by others. The application of relevant research methods are reviewed through discussions of exemplary articles published in leading journals. Cornerstone topics in this seminar include: theory construction, measurement, overview of data collection methods, reliability, as well as internal and external validity issues.
Note: Students who have taken MSCA 612, MSCA 613 or MSCA 614 may not take this seminar for credit.
MSCA 693 Seminar in Special Topics in Decision Sciences and Management Information Systems
Note: Changes in topic will be indicated by the letter following this seminar number (e.g., MSCA 693A, MSCA 693B).
EMBA 610 Measuring and Reporting Financial Performance (3 credits)
The focus of this course is on the use of financial statements to assess a company's performance and the creation of firm value. The objective is to understand the relation between a company's strategic decisions, business activities and its financial statements. It also examines how boards of directors and investors can gauge the effectiveness of managerial stewardship in the creation of shareholder value. The course is taught using the case method.
EMBA 611 Managing Talent (3 credits)
The issues related to the management of people within organizations are the focus of the course. The course covers the broad topics of human behaviour and motivation as well as the processes that influence these in organizational contexts. Topics include human resource planning, recruiting, selection, training and development, performance management, compensation and legal frameworks for non-union and union environments.  The course uses case studies, in-class exercises and exams. Students develop an understanding of the strategic partnership between the human resource function and managers allowing the company to capitalize fully on the potential of people as a source of competitive advantage.
EMBA 612 Marketing Management (3 credits)
The important role of marketing is studied and the skills developed to lead this function in an organization or to interact effectively with it. Attention is given to such topics as marketing planning, strategy formulation and control, customer focus, customer value creation, positioning, branding, pricing, communications and distribution. Deploying lectures, case discussions and application-oriented readings, the requisite mindset is nurtured to facilitate marketing excellence in today's multi-faceted and dynamic external environment.
EMBA 613 Capital Markets and Financial Management (3 credits)
The role of financial information in corporate management is examined. Students learn how the capital markets process and aggregate information provided by firms and governments in order to evaluate the risk and return trade-offs of business decisions. Students apply this knowledge to the evaluation of alternative investment opportunities. They learn how to identify and interpret the information needed to make profitable investment decisions.
EMBA 615 Live JMSB Experience (1 credit)
The Live JMSB Experience, an integrative course, gives students the opportunity to use the knowledge acquired during the first term in a context that mirrors the reality of contemporary business. Students are exposed to senior managers of a Canadian company facing strategic and managerial issues. Using critical thinking, students work in teams to craft a solution for the company and present their recommendations to a panel of the senior managers and faculty members.
EMBA 620 Value Creation through Business Processes (3 credits)
This course looks at how companies can improve their business processes to deliver services or build products that are valued by their customers. In today’s business environment, companies are closely interconnected with global supply chains and distribution channels as well as multiple stakeholders. In this course, students learn to design, operate and improve a network of operations among various stakeholders to ensure that systems are properly managed so that the flow of material and information is fluid. Some of the topics covered include supply chain network design, service delivery improvement, sourcing, risk management and enterprise resource planning (ERP).
EMBA 621 Information Technology and Digital Strategy (3 credits)
Students learn how advances in information technologies, connectivity and data analytics are transforming business models and creating new avenues for business value creation. This course provides students with a business-driven leadership perspective on information technology (IT) by leveraging digital technologies for competitive advantage. Within the context of  IT and digital strategy, topics covered may include: strategic alignment of IT, the impact of disruptive technologies on business models, effective leadership of IT, governance, project portfolio management, strategic sourcing, e-commerce, data analytics, privacy and cybersecurity.
EMBA 622 Business, Government and the Economy (1.5 credits)
The course provides a non-technical introduction to government policy analysis from the perspective of the business executive. We begin with a discussion of the differences between private and public goods and the impact of external forces on different stakeholders. The role of government and business in the creation and resolution of problems created by outside influences will be evaluated. Topics discussed in class may include the nature and role of public-private partnerships, regulation as both a limitation and an opportunity and the role of government in international trade and foreign direct investment.
EMBA 623 Managing in a Global Environment (3 credits)
The complexities of doing business in a global environment are studied. Major issues include supply chain management, cross-cultural management and communication, global investment and partnership, international strategy and marketing, international human resource management, ethics, law and social responsibility. A portion of this course also integrates the economic, social, cultural and business aspects of the region visited in the Global Experience course.
EMBA 625 Global Experience (1 credit)
This integrative course allows students to experience doing business abroad. Scheduled at the end of the second term, students have the opportunity to apply the business knowledge gained by being exposed to business practices in a specific region. The global experience takes students inside individual companies and industries abroad and provides them with an overview of the broader economic, political, social and cultural factors that influence business opportunities and practices.
EMBA 630 Financial Decisions Under Uncertainty (3 credits)
Students apply recent advances in corporate finance theory to evaluate complex decisions that may have a profound effect on the future of a firm. Through the use of cases and projects, students evaluate and recommend different decisions within the constraints imposed by the ownership and governance structure of the firm. Examples include making choices on raising debt or equity, using capital for investment or to reward shareholders and whether to go public or remain private.
EMBA 631 Management Control Systems (3 credits)
In this course, students learn how to use performance measurement, evaluation and incentive control systems to create value for an organization and its stakeholders. Control systems are critical for success in the implementation of a firm’s strategy and the course highlights several managerial challenges in this regard. Students learn to use limited physical, human and financial resources efficiently and creatively within uncertainty conditions. A “how-to” approach is adopted that emphasizes practical cases and applications reflecting real organizational issues.
EMBA 632 Creativity and Innovation (1.5 credits)
Students are introduced to the theoretical concepts of creativity and innovation with the goal of implementing novel ideas in organizations. The purpose is to develop students’ own creative abilities to solve business challenges in a more effective way. Based on lectures, case studies and experiential exercises, the course also proposes techniques needed to foster innovative processes in others.
EMBA 635 Starting a New Venture (3 credits)
The goal of this integrative course is to engage students in the theory and practice of entrepreneurship and innovation in businesses. The course is built around a group project whose objective is to create a comprehensive innovative business plan for a novel stand-alone business, or a new line of business within an existing organization. This project provides students with an opportunity to identify a market opportunity. Students assess its business potential and viability, structure and financing options as well as exit strategies. Groups present their business plans to a board of potential investors.
EMBA 640 Leadership (3 credits)
Leadership is the process of influencing and supporting others in the accomplishment of a common task. In addition to providing a critical review of key concepts, models, and theories of leadership, the course allows students to develop and apply their leadership abilities in organizational settings, especially in the context of change. Students are engaged in practical exercises, case studies, simulations and role-playing activities. Elements of the leadership development module are integrated and leveraged within the course in order to improve students’ ability to lead with purpose, inspire others and enable change.
EMBA 641 Corporate Governance (1.5 credits)
Students learn the principles and practices underlying governance, the system by which organizations are directed and controlled to create value for their shareholders but also to all stakeholders involved in its value chain.  Students review how an organization’s governance structure allocates rights and responsibilities to make decisions among stakeholders and specifies procedures for decision making. The course focus on the actions and decisions of corporate boards of directors and on their interactions with managers and stakeholders such as investors.  Particular attention is directed toward the ethical and sustainability dimensions of corporate governance.
EMBA 642 Crafting and Implementing a Winning Strategy (3 credits)
The important issues involved in developing strategy in various business sectors are the focus of the course. Students learn to formulate strategies that clearly state the growth path for companies. The course also looks at winning strategies defining how companies can compete against their rivals in specific business sectors. Students study strategy implementation and examine how functional strategies can be key instruments for business success. The course also looks at the relationship between strategy, culture and structure of the organization.
EMBA 646 Applied Field Project (3.5 credits)
This capstone integrative course provides students with the opportunity to tackle a major business problem or issue of their choice, thereby allowing them to apply the knowledge and competencies acquired in the program.  In teams, students develop a business project proposal focusing on a problem or issue faced by the organization they have chosen. Students are then expected to gather data and develop innovative and practical responses to the complex, cross-disciplinary issues faced by their client organization. Student teams are required to present a comprehensive set of recommendations to a panel comprised of faculty members, EMBA peers and representatives of the client organization. The key deliverable of this course is the actual set of recommendations and implementation plan designed to address the selected problem or issue.
MSCA 601: Financial Economics (3 credits)
MSCA 602: Applied Linear Statistical Models (3 credits)
MSCA 611: Research Methodology - Finance (3 credits)
15 credits of Finance seminars: (see Finance Seminars).
Upon approval of the Department  MSc Finance Advisor and the instructor, up to six credits of electives may include the following:
Seminars in any other JMSB MSc program;
PhD seminar in Finance (ADMI 840-849);
Cognate graduate seminars offered by other departments within the university
21 credits, MSCA 699: Research Thesis
Courses
Finance Seminars
Each year a selection of specialized seminars will be offered on a rotating basis from those listed below.
MSCA 621 Seminar in Investment Theory
MSCA 622 Seminar in Investment Management
MSCA 623 Seminar in Financial Theory and Corporate Policy
MSCA 624 Seminar in Mergers, Restructuring, and Corporate Control
MSCA 625 Seminar in Options and Futures
MSCA 632 Seminar in Special Topics in Finance
Note: Changes in topic will be indicated by the letter following this seminar number (e.g., MSCA 632A, MSCA 632B).
Seminar Descriptions
MSCA 601 Financial Economics
This course introduces the theory of financial decision making. The fundamental issue to be addressed in finance is the allocation of scarce resources between current consumption and future consumption (investment). The interesting questions will arise when one considers the valuation of risky investment opportunities. An additional objective of the seminar is to learn how to conduct and present research.
MSCA 602 Applied Linear Statistical Models
The course focuses on systematic treatments of linear statistical models for regression, analysis of variance and experimental design with special emphasis on applications in business and economics. Topics include regression analysis: inference, model building, diagnostics, remedial measures and validation; single-factor and two-factor ANOVA models, and analysis of covariance. Other statistical tools for specialized applications discussed may include logistic regression, path analysis and time series regression. Case studies are employed to illustrate tools for fitting, checking, validating and interpreting linear models.
MSCA 611 Research Methodology - Finance
This seminar studies several approaches that are used in conducting research in finance. There are three main objectives for this seminar: a) to provide guidance and experience in the design and critique of empirical research; b) to provide an introduction to the use of financial data bases; and c) to provide experience in the conduct of an empirial research project. Specific topics addressed include: event study methodologies, time-series issues including unit root problems and time varying volatility estimation, as well as qualitative choice methods, performance appraisal tests, and simultaneous equation estimation.
MSCA 699 Research Thesis (21 credits)
The MSc thesis is intended to provide candidates with an opportunity to carry out an in-depth investigation in a particular area of interest and to make a contribution to knowledge in the area. It is expected that the thesis will include a comprehensive and critical synthesis of the relevant literature and will also embody either a theoretical contribution to knowledge, a rigorous empirical investigation or both.
A Thesis Committee consists of a faculty member from the department as supervisor and two other faculty members. An Examining Committee consists of the Thesis Committee and a Thesis Examination Chair appointed by the Associate Dean, Research and Research Programs in accordance with the thesis regulations specified in the relevant section of this calendar.
GIIM 610 Economics (3 credits)
This course will examine the theoretical basis and investment implications of macroeconomic and microeconomic principles, including the key components of economic activity, industrial organization, macro theory and policy, international trade, and exchange rates.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 610, MIM 610, or IMBA 610 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 611 Financial Statement Analysis I (3 credits)
This course will examine the fundamental financial statements and the impact of different accounting principles on those statements. The course will examine the treatment of such items as income taxes, inventories, depreciation, and leases from the perspective of the investment analyst. International differences in accounting standards will also be examined.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 611, MIM 611, or IMBA 611 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 613 Asset Pricing and Portfolio Management I (1.5 credits)
This course will examine the efficient markets hypothesis and introduce the classic asset pricing models (domestic and international). The key elements of the theory and practice of the portfolio management process, including investment policy, asset allocation, and client relations will be examined in the domestic and international context.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 613, MIM 613, or IMBA 613 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 614 Security Valuation in the Domestic and International Environment (3 credits)
This course will examine security (equity and fixed income) risk and valuation (for companies and industries) using alternative methodologies. The characteristics of global financial markets and the implications for security valuation will be examined. The theory and analysis of derivative securities will be introduced.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 614, MIM 614, or IMBA 614 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 615 CFA® Exam Preparation Course Level I (1.5 credits)
This course will review the material needed for the Level I CFA® exam. Successful completion of this course includes passing the CFA® Level I Exam.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 615, MIM 615, or IMBA 615 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 616 Quantitative Techniques (3 credits)
This course will examine the nature of the models used in the valuation and evaluation of investments, the theoretical and practical use of these models, comparison of classical or traditional models based on statistical analysis versus those based on more recent developments.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 612, MIM 612, IMBA 612, DIM 616, MIM 616, or IMBA 616 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 617 Corporate Finance (1.5 credits)
This module covers the theory and practice of corporate finance with emphasis on concepts such as cash flow, liquidity, leverage, cost of capital, project evaluation, and dividend policy.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 612, MIM 612, IMBA 612, DIM 617, MIM 617, or IMBA 617 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 618 Seminar in Corporate Finance (3 credits)
Prerequisite: For MIM and GIIM MBA Students: GIIM 615 or DIM 615 or MIM 615 or IMBA 615.
This course focuses on the application of modern finance theory to corporate decisions. It examines the firm’s investment and financial decisions under various economic and financial conditions. Specific topics include mergers and acquisitions, leverage buyout decisions and dividend and equity management strategies.
Note: Students who have taken MIM 618 or IMBA 618 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 619 Marketing Management (3 credits)
The main goal of this course is to develop a comprehensive understanding of the strategic role of marketing within the firm and within the Canadian context. It covers all aspects of the marketing management process. This course is designed to help develop the necessary skills to analyze market opportunities, research and select target markets, design effective marketing strategies, plan marketing programs, and organize, implement and control the marketing effort. The specificities of the marketing of services and their implications in terms of marketing strategies are emphasized.
GIIM 620 Financial Statement Analysis II (3 credits)
Prerequisite: For MIM and GIIM MBA students: GIIM 615 or DIM 615 or MIM 615 or IMBA 615.
This course examines the analysis and use of financial statements and disclosures in the investment valuation process, as well as the impact of international differences and managerial choice on the financial statements.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 620, MIM 620, or IMBA 620 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 621 Fixed Income Analysis (1.5 credits)
Prerequisite: For MIM and GIIM MBA students: GIIM 615 or DIM 615 or MIM 615 or IMBA 615.
This course deals with the risk and return characteristics of debt instruments, term structure of interest rates, valuation of securities with embedded derivative securities or other unique features. The unique features of real estate and private equity investments are also covered.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 621, MIM 621, or IMBA 621 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 622 Derivatives (3 credits)
Prerequisite: For MIM and GIIM MBA students: GIIM 615 or DIM 615 or MIM 615 or IMBA 615.
This course focuses on the theory and practice of futures, swaps and option valuation.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 622, MIM 622, or IMBA 622 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 623 Asset Pricing and Portfolio Management II (1.5 credits)
Prerequisite: For MIM and GIIM MBA students: GIIM 615 or DIM 615 or MIM 615 or IMBA 615.
This course analyzes the theory and critically evaluates the empirical evidence regarding asset pricing models. Implications for the correlation structure of returns and the impact on risk and return forecasting are also covered. This course discusses the role of alternative portfolio management philosophies and their implications for asset valuations and portfolio performance evaluation. Topics include the use and role of quantitative methods in the evaluation and forecasting of investment performance as well as the implications of asset pricing model predictions and failures for portfolio management.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 623, MIM 623, or IMBA 623 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 624 Analysis of Equity Investments (3 credits)
Prerequisite: For MIM and GIIM MBA students: GIIM 615 or DIM 615 or MIM 615 or IMBA 615.
This course reviews the use of fundamental analysis and other methodologies to generate investment valuations and risk analyses. The impact of special situations on the valuation process and the valuation of equity derivative securities will be examined.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 624, MIM 624, or IMBA 624 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 625 CFA® Exam Preparation Course Level II (non-credit)
Prerequisite: GIIM 615, DIM 615, MIM 615 or IMBA 615.
This course will review the material needed for the Level II CFA® exam. Permission of the Program is required to register for this course.
GIIM 626 Organizational Behaviour (3 credits)
This course focuses on individual and group behavior and the interactions of behavioural phenomena. Concepts such as motivation, leadership, group behaviour and managing change in organizations are examined. Students acquire an understanding of change processes and skills relating to organizational diagnosis and change.
GIIM 631 Asset Allocation and Performance Measurement (3 credits)
Prerequisite: GIIM 625, DIM 625, MIM 625, or IMBA 625.
This course will examine the estimation of expected returns and risks for asset classes and individual assets, the development of strategies for managing portfolios of domestic and foreign securities (equity, fixed income, real estate, etc.), the management of portfolio risk, and the evaluation of portfolio and manager performance.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 631, MIM 631, IMBA 631, DIM 632, MIM 632, or IMBA 632 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 633 Investment Law and Ethics (3 credits)
Prerequisite: For MIM and GIIM MBA students: GIIM 625 or DIM 625 or MIM 625 or IMBA 625.
This course covers issues regarding the management of investment funds including techniques for the identification and prevention of professional misconduct, and the nature and drafting of compliance procedures. The practice of portfolio management and investment valuation are studied through the use of topical cases.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 633, MIM 633, or IMBA 633 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 634 CFA® Exam Preparation Course Level III (non-credit)
Prerequisite: GIIM 625, DIM 625, MIM 625, or IMBA 625.
This course will review the material needed for the Level III CFA® exam. Permission of the Program is required to register for this course.
GIIM 636 Alternative Investments (1.5 credits)
Prerequisite: GIIM 625, DIM 625, MIM 625, or IMBA 625.
This course will cover a description of investments such as hedge funds, real estate and the private equity market.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 621, MIM 621, IMBA 621, MIM 636, or IMBA 636 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 637 Strategic Management (3 credits)
This course integrates the core functional disciplines of business within a strategic perspective and introduces several strategic management concepts, including industry analysis and dynamics, the organizational resource audit, strategic typologies, the role of the general manager, and the management of strategic transformations. The principal goal is to develop and enhance student ability in problem identification, environmental and organizational analysis, strategic alternative formulation, and action implementation. The pedagogy of the course is based upon comprehensive case studies that deal with strategic issues in a variety of contemporary business contexts.
GIIM 653 Seminar in Investment Analysis and Management (3 credits)
Prerequisite: GIIM 625, DIM 625, MIM 625, or IMBA 625.
This course will concentrate heavily on portfolio risk management issues. Topics such as the effect of cash drag, the use of equity and debt derivatives to manage risk and the uses and abuses of value at risk (VAR) will be explored. Other topics include equity style and its importance index funds and relevant criteria for the selection of investment managers.
Note: Students who have taken MIM 653 or IMBA 653 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 654 Seminar in International Investment Analysis and Management (3 credits)
Prerequisite: GIIM 625, DIM 625, MIM 625, or IMBA 625.
This course begins with a discussion of exchange rates and to what extent economic factors and market sentiment are important in the determination of these rates. Issues of importance that international investors face will be examined along with the benefits of international diversification. The course will conclude with the analysis of issues relevant to emerging markets and factors that would influence the construction of a portfolio that may include an emerging market component.
Note: Students who have taken MIM 654 or IMBA 654 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 655 Socially Responsible and Sustainable Investment (3 credits)
The aim of this course is to provide students with a knowledge of socially responsible investment related issues that transcend the modern portfolio theory of Markowitz. Students gain an understanding of sustainable and responsible investment. They also develop the ability to uncover non-traditional risk and return drivers. Relevant case studies and a series of readings are relied upon to provide the basis for the course.
GIIM 695 Special Topics in Investment Management (3 credits)
Note: When offered, this course may substitute a GIIM required core course, for which students must obtain approval of the Program Director in order to register.
GIIM 695 Special Topics in Investment Management (3 credits)
Note: When offered, this course may substitute a GIIM required core course, for which students must obtain approval of the Program Director in order to register.
Non-credit Electives
GIIM 625 CFA® Exam Preparation Course Level II
GIIM 634 CFA® Exam Preparation Course Level III
Course Descriptions
GIIM 610 Economics (3 credits)
This course will examine the theoretical basis and investment implications of macroeconomic and microeconomic principles, including the key components of economic activity, industrial organization, macro theory and policy, international trade, and exchange rates.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 610, MIM 610, or IMBA 610 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 611 Financial Statement Analysis I (3 credits)
This course will examine the fundamental financial statements and the impact of different accounting principles on those statements. The course will examine the treatment of such items as income taxes, inventories, depreciation, and leases from the perspective of the investment analyst. International differences in accounting standards will also be examined.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 611, MIM 611, or IMBA 611 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 613 Asset Pricing and Portfolio Management I (1.5 credits)
This course will examine the efficient markets hypothesis and introduce the classic asset pricing models (domestic and international). The key elements of the theory and practice of the portfolio management process, including investment policy, asset allocation, and client relations will be examined in the domestic and international context.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 613, MIM 613, or IMBA 613 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 614 Security Valuation in the Domestic and International Environment (3 credits)
This course will examine security (equity and fixed income) risk and valuation (for companies and industries) using alternative methodologies. The characteristics of global financial markets and the implications for security valuation will be examined. The theory and analysis of derivative securities will be introduced.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 614, MIM 614, or IMBA 614 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 615 CFA® Exam Preparation Course Level I (1.5 credits)
This course will review the material needed for the Level I CFA® exam. Successful completion of this course includes passing the CFA® Level I Exam.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 615, MIM 615, or IMBA 615 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 616 Quantitative Techniques (3 credits)
This course will examine the nature of the models used in the valuation and evaluation of investments, the theoretical and practical use of these models, comparison of classical or traditional models based on statistical analysis versus those based on more recent developments.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 612, MIM 612, IMBA 612, DIM 616, MIM 616, or IMBA 616 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 617 Corporate Finance (1.5 credits)
This module covers the theory and practice of corporate finance with emphasis on concepts such as cash flow, liquidity, leverage, cost of capital, project evaluation, and dividend policy.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 612, MIM 612, IMBA 612, DIM 617, MIM 617, or IMBA 617 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 618 Seminar in Corporate Finance (3 credits)
Prerequisite: For MIM and GIIM MBA Students: GIIM 615 or DIM 615 or MIM 615 or IMBA 615.
This course focuses on the application of modern finance theory to corporate decisions. It examines the firm’s investment and financial decisions under various economic and financial conditions. Specific topics include mergers and acquisitions, leverage buyout decisions and dividend and equity management strategies.
Note: Students who have taken MIM 618 or IMBA 618 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 619 Marketing Management (3 credits)
The main goal of this course is to develop a comprehensive understanding of the strategic role of marketing within the firm and within the Canadian context. It covers all aspects of the marketing management process. This course is designed to help develop the necessary skills to analyze market opportunities, research and select target markets, design effective marketing strategies, plan marketing programs, and organize, implement and control the marketing effort. The specificities of the marketing of services and their implications in terms of marketing strategies are emphasized.
GIIM 620 Financial Statement Analysis II (3 credits)
Prerequisite: For MIM and GIIM MBA students: GIIM 615 or DIM 615 or MIM 615 or IMBA 615.
This course examines the analysis and use of financial statements and disclosures in the investment valuation process, as well as the impact of international differences and managerial choice on the financial statements.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 620, MIM 620, or IMBA 620 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 621 Fixed Income Analysis (1.5 credits)
Prerequisite: For MIM and GIIM MBA students: GIIM 615 or DIM 615 or MIM 615 or IMBA 615.
This course deals with the risk and return characteristics of debt instruments, term structure of interest rates, valuation of securities with embedded derivative securities or other unique features. The unique features of real estate and private equity investments are also covered.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 621, MIM 621, or IMBA 621 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 622 Derivatives (3 credits)
Prerequisite: For MIM and GIIM MBA students: GIIM 615 or DIM 615 or MIM 615 or IMBA 615.
This course focuses on the theory and practice of futures, swaps and option valuation.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 622, MIM 622, or IMBA 622 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 623 Asset Pricing and Portfolio Management II (1.5 credits)
Prerequisite: For MIM and GIIM MBA students: GIIM 615 or DIM 615 or MIM 615 or IMBA 615.
This course analyzes the theory and critically evaluates the empirical evidence regarding asset pricing models. Implications for the correlation structure of returns and the impact on risk and return forecasting are also covered. This course discusses the role of alternative portfolio management philosophies and their implications for asset valuations and portfolio performance evaluation. Topics include the use and role of quantitative methods in the evaluation and forecasting of investment performance as well as the implications of asset pricing model predictions and failures for portfolio management.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 623, MIM 623, or IMBA 623 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 624 Analysis of Equity Investments (3 credits)
Prerequisite: For MIM and GIIM MBA students: GIIM 615 or DIM 615 or MIM 615 or IMBA 615.
This course reviews the use of fundamental analysis and other methodologies to generate investment valuations and risk analyses. The impact of special situations on the valuation process and the valuation of equity derivative securities will be examined.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 624, MIM 624, or IMBA 624 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 625 CFA® Exam Preparation Course Level II (non-credit)
Prerequisite: GIIM 615, DIM 615, MIM 615 or IMBA 615.
This course will review the material needed for the Level II CFA® exam. Permission of the Program is required to register for this course.
GIIM 626 Organizational Behaviour (3 credits)
This course focuses on individual and group behavior and the interactions of behavioural phenomena. Concepts such as motivation, leadership, group behaviour and managing change in organizations are examined. Students acquire an understanding of change processes and skills relating to organizational diagnosis and change.
GIIM 631 Asset Allocation and Performance Measurement (3 credits)
Prerequisite: GIIM 625, DIM 625, MIM 625, or IMBA 625.
This course will examine the estimation of expected returns and risks for asset classes and individual assets, the development of strategies for managing portfolios of domestic and foreign securities (equity, fixed income, real estate, etc.), the management of portfolio risk, and the evaluation of portfolio and manager performance.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 631, MIM 631, IMBA 631, DIM 632, MIM 632, or IMBA 632 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 633 Investment Law and Ethics (3 credits)
Prerequisite: For MIM and GIIM MBA students: GIIM 625 or DIM 625 or MIM 625 or IMBA 625.
This course covers issues regarding the management of investment funds including techniques for the identification and prevention of professional misconduct, and the nature and drafting of compliance procedures. The practice of portfolio management and investment valuation are studied through the use of topical cases.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 633, MIM 633, or IMBA 633 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 634 CFA® Exam Preparation Course Level III (non-credit)
Prerequisite: GIIM 625, DIM 625, MIM 625, or IMBA 625.
This course will review the material needed for the Level III CFA® exam. Permission of the Program is required to register for this course.
GIIM 636 Alternative Investments (1.5 credits)
Prerequisite: GIIM 625, DIM 625, MIM 625, or IMBA 625.
This course will cover a description of investments such as hedge funds, real estate and the private equity market.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 621, MIM 621, IMBA 621, MIM 636, or IMBA 636 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 637 Strategic Management (3 credits)
This course integrates the core functional disciplines of business within a strategic perspective and introduces several strategic management concepts, including industry analysis and dynamics, the organizational resource audit, strategic typologies, the role of the general manager, and the management of strategic transformations. The principal goal is to develop and enhance student ability in problem identification, environmental and organizational analysis, strategic alternative formulation, and action implementation. The pedagogy of the course is based upon comprehensive case studies that deal with strategic issues in a variety of contemporary business contexts.
GIIM 653 Seminar in Investment Analysis and Management (3 credits)
Prerequisite: GIIM 625, DIM 625, MIM 625, or IMBA 625.
This course will concentrate heavily on portfolio risk management issues. Topics such as the effect of cash drag, the use of equity and debt derivatives to manage risk and the uses and abuses of value at risk (VAR) will be explored. Other topics include equity style and its importance index funds and relevant criteria for the selection of investment managers.
Note: Students who have taken MIM 653 or IMBA 653 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 654 Seminar in International Investment Analysis and Management (3 credits)
Prerequisite: GIIM 625, DIM 625, MIM 625, or IMBA 625.
This course begins with a discussion of exchange rates and to what extent economic factors and market sentiment are important in the determination of these rates. Issues of importance that international investors face will be examined along with the benefits of international diversification. The course will conclude with the analysis of issues relevant to emerging markets and factors that would influence the construction of a portfolio that may include an emerging market component.
Note: Students who have taken MIM 654 or IMBA 654 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 655 Socially Responsible and Sustainable Investment (3 credits)
The aim of this course is to provide students with a knowledge of socially responsible investment related issues that transcend the modern portfolio theory of Markowitz. Students gain an understanding of sustainable and responsible investment. They also develop the ability to uncover non-traditional risk and return drivers. Relevant case studies and a series of readings are relied upon to provide the basis for the course.
GIIM 695 Special Topics in Investment Management (3 credits)
Note: When offered, this course may substitute a GIIM required core course, for which students must obtain approval of the Program Director in order to register.
MBA in Investment Management Co-operative Option
The MBA in Investment Management Co-operative Option is non-credit and is offered to all students who are enrolled in the John Molson MBA in Investment Management Program.
Students accepted into the Co-op must be registered as full-time, have completed 19.5 credits, maintain a cumulative GPA of 3.0 or better and must be approved by the Director of the program.
New students complete one work term (four months). In special cases, students may complete a second term with the permission of the Program Director and Institute for Co-operative Education. Students must return to full-time study for their last term.
MSCA 602: Applied Linear Statistical Models (3 credits)
MSCA 615: Research Methodology - Administrative Sciences (3 credits)
18 credits of Management seminars: (see Management Seminars).
Upon approval of the Department MSc Management Advisor and the instructor, up to nine credits may include the following:
Seminars in any other JMSB MSc program;
PhD seminar in Management (ADMI 810-819 and ADMI 850-859).
Cognate graduate seminars offered by other departments within the university
21 credits, MSCA 699: Research Thesis
Courses
Management Seminars
Each year a selection of specialized seminars will be offered on a rotating basis from those listed below.
MSCA 640 Seminar in Organizational Behaviour
MSCA 641 Seminar in Staffing and Career Management
MSCA 643  Seminar in Motivation, Evaluation and Rewards
MSCA 644 Seminar in Meso Organizational Behaviour
MSCA 645 Seminar in Organizational Theory and Design
MSCA 646 Seminar in Leadership
MSCA 647 Seminar in Strategic Management in Global Context
MSCA 648 Seminar in International Management
MSCA 649 Seminar in Comparative Corporate Governance
MSCA 651 Seminar in Entrepreneurship across Contexts
MSCA 652 Seminar in Special Topics in Management
Note: Changes in topic will be indicated by the letter following this seminar number (e.g., MSCA 652A, MSCA 652B).
MSCA 654 Seminar in Consulting
Seminar Descriptions
MSCA 602 Applied Linear Statistical Models
The course focuses on systematic treatments of linear statistical models for regression, analysis of variance and experimental design with special emphasis on applications in business and economics. Topics include regression analysis: inference, model building, diagnostics, remedial measures and validation; single-factor and two-factor ANOVA models, and analysis of covariance. Other statistical tools for specialized applications discussed may include logistic regression, path analysis and time series regression. Case studies are employed to illustrate tools for fitting, checking, validating and interpreting linear models.
MSCA 615 Research Methodology - Administrative Sciences
This seminar provides a basic understanding of the research process and a knowledge of the methods used in the design and execution of scientific research relevant to social sciences, and specifically the business context. The seminar helps students to develop skills needed to assess the feasibility and potential contribution of proposed studies, and to critically evaluate research reported by others. The application of relevant research methods are reviewed through discussions of exemplary articles published in leading journals. Cornerstone topics in this seminar include: theory construction, measurement, overview of data collection methods, reliability, as well as internal and external validity issues.
Note: Students who have taken MSCA 612, MSCA 613 or MSCA 614 may not take this seminar for credit.
MSCA 640 Seminar in Organizational Behaviour (3 credits)
This course reviews the important developments in administrative and behavioural thinking and focuses on the work of management scholars who have made significant contributions to the theory and practice of management. The course spans the various levels of organization analysis (individual, group and organizational) and a variety of perspectives on organizational behaviour, organizational theory and administrative thought. Students are expected to understand and be able to assess critically the concepts, theories and scholarly contributions of material covered in this course. The state of the art both in theory and empirical research are emphasized.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a MSCA 652 number may not take this course for credit.
MSCA 641 Seminar in Staffing and Career Management (3 credits)
This seminar provides an overview of theory, research, and applications in the fields of staffing and career management. We discuss the processes of getting job applicants into organizations and of retaining them and moving them through the ranks once they are there. Specific topics to be explored include organizational context and staffing strategy, legal issues, internal and external recruitment processes, selection methods, promotions and employee training. Emphasis is placed on scholarly reviews of the evidence, analysis of primary research articles, and the application of science-based practice to the processes of staffing and career management.
MSCA 643 Seminar in Motivation, Evaluation and Rewards (3 credits)
This seminar is designed to help students learn about theory, research, and applications in the field of human resource management, specifically with regards to the topics of: motivation, performance evaluation, financial and non-financial rewards, and employee well-being. The impact of these activities on international human resource management is also covered. Students become familiar with the dominant approaches pertaining to these topics, and reflect on how these topics are related to one another. Students also learn about how to conduct high-quality research on these topics, and how to use research to solve organizational problems.
MSCA 644 Seminar in Meso Organizational Behaviour
Meso organizational behaviour focuses on understanding organizational phenomena by bridging concepts or theories at the individual (i.e. micro) and the contextual (i.e.macro) levels of analysis. The seminar examines people within organizations by exploring different levels of analysis, including individuals, groups, departments, organizations, industries, and societies. It focuses on better understanding how similar phenomena may operate at different levels, how phenomena at any one level are shaped by phenomena at other levels, and the reciprocal dynamics that exist between levels to make up the world of organizations in which we live and work. Meso organizational behaviour is important because: (a) it helps students of human resource management better understand the systemic factors that contribute to how individuals think, feel, and act in organizations; and (b) it helps students better understand how organizations are shaped by the people that populate them.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a MSCA 652 number may not take this course for credit.
MSCA 645 Seminar in Organizational Theory and Design (3 credits)
In this seminar we explore organizations and organizational environments. The primary aim is to introduce students to an understanding of how organizational scholars have conceptualized and studied organizations as systems of structures and relations and as cultural systems, and how these systems interact with and are embedded in the context of an external environment. To accomplish this aim the seminar focuses on some basic sociological tools for conceptually investigating a variety of organizational topics. Students acquire an in-depth understanding of how organizations are made up of formal, relational and cultural structures both inside and outside the organizational boundary. Some topics and conceptual frameworks include power, conflict, organizational identity and image, organizational control, discourse and rhetoric, legitimacy, organizational impression management, emergence of new organizations, and organizational change.
MSCA 646 Seminar in Leadership (3 credits)
This course adopts the interactional framework of leadership, which considers that the leadership process is a function of three components: the leader, the followers, and the context. The course is structured to cover classic and emergent theories that address each of these components; though most theories focus on one of these three components, they also inform the other components in the model, either implicitly or explicitly. Implications for the practice of leadership are addressed through class discussions. An effort is made to ensure that students do not adopt a myopic view of leadership. Rather, different perspectives on the process of leadership are presented, that make radically different assumptions. Students are therefore required to identify these assumptions and develop well-articulated arguments that either support or refute these assumptions in order to develop a sophisticated view of leadership.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a MSCA 652 number may not take this course for credit.
MSCA 647 Seminar in Strategic Management in Global Context (3 credits)
This seminar provides a broad survey of core literature and research findings in the strategic-management and international-business fields, exploring the opportunities and challenges associated with conducting business in a global context. The objective of this course is to provide a theoretical overview of strategic management with a particular emphasis on the strategy of multinational enterprises. By the end of the course, students should understand the basic theories within the field and should develop their skills in framing research questions relevant to strategy or globalization.
MSCA 648 Seminar in International Management (3 credits)
This seminar is designed to introduce students to the key concepts and important areas of research related to globalization, multinational corporate strategies, and organizations and management systems in both developed and developing countries. We start with an overview of international management and multinational enterprise theories followed by a discussion on important methodological issues for doing research in an international context. The impacts of national culture and national institutions of different countries on today’s global business environment are discussed as well. Specific areas such as internationalization of small and medium-sized enterprises, entry modes, international joint ventures, and management practices are covered. The seminar concludes by discussing future research trends in this field. A key goal is to articulate appropriate research questions, develop theoretical frameworks, design empirical strategies, and to write an academic paper using key components from this seminar.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a MSCA 652 number may not take this course for credit.
MSCA 649 Seminar in Comparative Corporate Governance (3 credits)
Corporate governance, defined broadly, is the study of power and influence over decision making within the corporation. Comparative corporate governance examines how institutions in different social and economic contexts influence this relationship and its consequences for the ownership, management, and strategic competitiveness of firms. In this seminar we address questions such as: How is corporate governance practised in different countries? Why are corporate governance practices similar or different across countries? Can we identify international best practices of corporate governance? To what extent are corporate governance best practices transferable across international contexts? How do different systems of corporate governance embody different economic, social, and political trade-offs among corporate stakeholders? We approach the questions from managerial, economic, legal, political, sociological and cultural perspectives. Using both conceptual and empirical studies, we also focus on a range of substantial issues, including corporate governance in family firms and in emerging market business groups.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a MSCA 652 number may not take this course for credit.
MSCA 651 Seminar in Entrepreneurship across Contexts (3 credits)
This course provides an overview of the diverse manifestations of contemporary entrepreneurship research. We review and critically evaluate the study of entrepreneurship across the contexts of new venture creation, family, social, sustainable, corporate, bottom of the pyramid and others. We cross levels of analysis—from individual to family, to firm, to network, to industry—and theoretical traditions. There is a strong emphasis on critical reasoning, empirical scrutiny and theoretical development. Students develop competencies in all aspects of the entrepreneurship research process, culminating with their own independent contributions to the field through a novel research paper.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a MSCA 652 number may not take this course for credit.
MSCA 654 Seminar in Consulting (3 credits)
This course focuses on the management consulting profession and process. The course is structured around three parallel streams and provides important concepts and ideas for the tool-kit of the management consultant involved in analytical as well as change implementation projects. The first stream of the course examines the consulting process, i.e. the five phases of a consulting project from entry to termination. The second stream focuses on core consulting skills, i.e. the skills required to operate and succeed as a management consultant. These skills are essential for any type of consulting engagement, whether one works as an external or internal consultant, and whether the client in a private sector, public, or non-profit organization. The third stream is a real world consulting project that students conduct in teams with a client firm in order to apply the tools and skills discussed in class. The course concludes by reflecting on the role of internal consultants and management consulting as a career choice.
MSCA 699 Research Thesis (21 credits)
The MSc thesis is intended to provide candidates with an opportunity to carry out an investigation in-depth in a particular area of interest and to make a contribution to knowledge in the area. It is expected that the thesis will include a comprehensive and critical synthesis of the relevant literature and will also embody either a theoretical contribution to knowledge, a rigorous empirical investigation or both.
A Thesis Committee consists of a faculty member from the department as supervisor and two other faculty members. An Examining Committee consists of the Thesis Committee and a Thesis Examination Chair appointed by the Associate Dean, Research and Research Programs in accordance with the thesis regulations specified in the relevant section of this calendar.
MSCA 602: Applied Linear Statistical Models (3 credits)
MSCA 615: Research Methodology - Administrative Sciences (3 credits)
18 credits of Marketing seminars: (see Marketing Seminars).
Upon approval of the Department MSc Marketing Advisor and the instructor, up to nine credits may include the following:
Seminars in any other JMSB MSc program
PhD seminar in Marketing (ADMI 830-839)
Cognate graduate seminars offered by other departments within the university
21 credits, MSCA 699: Research Thesis
Courses
Marketing Seminars
Each year a selection of specialized seminars will be offered on a rotating basis from those listed below.
MSCA 662 Seminar in Qualitative Research 1
MSCA 663 Seminar in Consumer Research Methods 2
MSCA 665 Seminar in Marketing Communications
MSCA 667 Seminar in Consumer Psychology and Decision Making 3
MSCA 668 Seminar in Innovation and Marketing
MSCA 669 Seminar in Pricing Management 4
MSCA 671 Seminar in Relationship Marketing Strategy 5
MSCA 672 Seminar in Special Topics in Marketing *
MSCA 673 Seminar in Segmentation and Positioning in Marketing 6
MSCA 674 Seminar in Meaning and Management of Brands 7
MSCA 675 Seminar in Retailing 8
MSCA 677 Seminar in Sustainability in Marketing 9
Notes:
Students who have received credit for the Seminar in Qualitative Research under a MSCA 672 number may not take MSCA 662 for credit.
Students who have received credit for the Seminar in Consumer Research Methodology under a MSCA 672 number may not take MSCA 663 for credit
Students who have received credit for the Seminar in Consumer Psychology and Decision Making under a MSCA 672 number may not take MSCA 667 for credit
Students who have received credit for the Seminar in Pricing Management under a MSCA 672 number may not take MSCA 669 for credit
Students who have received credit for the Seminar in Relationship Marketing Strategy under a MSCA 672 number may not take MSCA 671 for credit
Students who have received credit for the Seminar in Segmentation and Positioning in Marketing may not take MSCA 673 for credit
Students who have received credit for the Seminar in Brand Management under a MSCA 672 number may not take MSCA 674 for credit
Students who have received credit for the Seminar in Research in Retailing under a MSCA 672 number may not take MSCA 675 for credit
Students who have received credit for the Seminar in Sustainability in Marketing under a MSCA 672 number may not take MSCA 677 for credit
* Subject matter will vary from term to term and students may take more than one of these courses, provided that course content has changed.
MSCA 602 Applied Linear Statistical Models
The course focuses on systematic treatments of linear statistical models for regression, analysis of variance and experimental design with special emphasis on applications in business and economics. Topics include regression analysis: inference, model building, diagnostics, remedial measures and validation; single-factor and two-factor ANOVA models, and analysis of covariance. Other statistical tools for specialized applications discussed may include logistic regression, path analysis and time series regression. Case studies are employed to illustrate tools for fitting, checking, validating and interpreting linear models.
MSCA 615 Research Methodology - Administrative Sciences
This seminar provides a basic understanding of the research process and a knowledge of the methods used in the design and execution of scientific research relevant to social sciences, and specifically the business context. The seminar helps students to develop skills needed to assess the feasibility and potential contribution of proposed studies, and to critically evaluate research reported by others. The application of relevant research methods are reviewed through discussions of exemplary articles published in leading journals. Cornerstone topics in this seminar include: theory construction, measurement, overview of data collection methods, reliability, as well as internal and external validity issues.
Note: Students who have taken MSCA 612, MSCA 613 or MSCA 614 may not take this seminar for credit.
MSCA 699 Research Thesis (21 credits)
The MSc thesis is intended to provide candidates with an opportunity to carry out an investigation in-depth in a particular area of interest and to make a contribution to knowledge in the area. It is expected that the thesis will include a comprehensive and critical synthesis of the relevant literature and will also embody either a theoretical contribution to knowledge, a rigorous empirical investigation or both.
A Thesis Committee consists of a faculty member from the department as supervisor and two other faculty members. An Examining Committee consists of the Thesis Committee and a Thesis Examination Chair appointed by the Associate Dean, Research and Research Programs in accordance with the thesis regulations specified in the relevant section of this calendar.
MBA Option for Diploma in Chartered Professional Accountancy Students. Students in good academic standing who meet the admission requirements of the MBA Program, and who have completed the requirements for the Diploma in Chartered Professional Accountancy Program within the last five years, may be granted advanced standing for up to 21 credits upon admission to the MBA Program and will be required to take the following courses (24 credits):
MBA 640 On Ramp (0 credits)
MBA 641 Responsible Manager (3 credits)
MBA 644 Marketing Management (3 credits)
MBA 645 Economics for Organizational Decision Making (3 credits)
MBA 647 Managing People in Organizations (3 credits)
MBA 650 Crafting and Implementing Successful Strategies (3 credits)
+3 electives
MBA Option for Diploma in Chartered Accountancy Students. Students in good academic standing who meet the admission requirements of the MBA Program, and who have completed the requirements for the Diploma in Chartered Accountancy Program within the last five years, may be granted advanced standing for up to 21 credits upon admission to the MBA Program and will be required to take the following courses(24 credits):
MBA 640 On Ramp (0 credits)
MBA 641 Responsible Manager (3 credits)
MBA 644 Marketing Management (3 credits)
MBA 645 Economics for Organizational Decision Making (3 credits)
MBA 647   Managing People in Organizations (3 credits)
MBA 650 Crafting and Implementing Successful Strategies (3 credits)
+ 3 electives
MBA Option for Graduate Certificate in Management Accounting Students. Students in good academic standing who meet the admission requirements of the MBA Program, and who have completed the requirements for the Graduate Certificate in Management Accountancy Program within the last five years, may be granted advanced standing for up to 15 credits upon admission to the MBA Program and will be required to take the following courses (30 credits):
MBA 640 On Ramp (0 credits)
MBA 641 Responsible Manager (3 credits)
MBA 643 Managerial analytics (3 credits)
MBA 644 Marketing Management (3 credits)
MBA 645 Economics for Organizational Decision Making (3 credits)
MBA 647 Managing People in Organizations (3 credits)
MBA 648 Business Process Management (3 credits)
MBA 650 Crafting and Implementing Successful Strategies (3 credits)
+ 3 electives
Academic Regulations
Course Load for Full-time Students. The course load for a full-time student is a minimum of 12 credits of course work per term. Students can accelerate their progress by taking courses in the Summer term.
Course Load for Part-time Students. The normal course load for a part-time student is a minimum of 12 credits per calendar year. A part-time student may not, without permission, register for more than 6 credits in each of the Fall and Winter terms, but may accelerate their progress in the program by taking courses in the Summer term.
Change of Status. Students may be granted permission to change their status from part-time to full-time or vice-versa. If a change is permitted, the student’s program time limit will be adjusted accordingly.
Course Load Reduction. In exceptional circumstances, students may be granted permission to reduce their course load below the normal specified in paragraphs 1 and 2 above, while remaining in good standing. Full-time students completing less than 9 credits per term will be reclassified as part-time, and must comply with the course load requirements for part-time students, specified in paragraph 2 above.
Part-time students with a reduced course load must complete a minimum of 9 credits per year, including the Summer term. Full- and part-time students who have been granted such permission will be subject to specific conditions, as outlined in the section on Academic Standing.
Program and Course Withdrawal. Students who wish to apply for withdrawal from the MBA program must do so in writing at the MBA Program office. Students may drop a course up to the end of the course change period. (This is normally about two weeks after classes begin – see Academic Calendar.) Application to drop a course must be made in writing at the MBA Program office. Students should bear in mind the minimum and maximum course load regulations specified above, when dropping or adding courses.
Academic Standing. Please refer to the Academic Standing section of the Calendar for a detailed review of the Academic Regulations.
Business Communication Skills. All students in the MBA Program must demonstrate a high level of competence in written and oral communications. A strong managerial communications component has been designed into a number of MBA courses to help students evaluate and develop their skills in this area. Students who exhibit deficiencies in communication skills will be expected to obtain appropriate assistance through designated courses, workshops or individual tutorial support.
Cognate Courses. Subject to the approval of the MBA Program Director and the departments concerned, MBA students are permitted to choose courses from those offered by other programs within the John Molson School of Business or from courses offered by other Faculties. A maximum of 12 credits can be selected from courses outside the John Molson School of Business.
Graduation Requirement. In order to graduate, students must have a cumulative GPA of 2.70 or better.
Program Structure
Qualifying Courses
Normally, students who require qualifying courses will have to complete them during the first term of their program of study.
COMM 610 Basic Quantitative Skills for Administration (1.5 credits)
This course revisits and strengthens the basic algebra and statistics skills presented in MBA 640. The course uses a combination of online lectures and workshops and in person tutorials to develop and apply these skills to different business problems. Assessment is carried out via assignments and a final exam.
Notes:
Students who have received credit for COMM 500 or COMM 600 may not take this course for credit.
COMM 610 must be successfully completed in the first term of the MBA Program.
Courses in the John Molson MBA Program
After successfully completing the qualifying course (if necessary), students in the MBA Programcomplete 45 credits comprising the core courses and electives. Full-time students will normally complete the program within two years of their first registration.
The purpose of these core courses is to provide an integrated and rigorous body of functionally oriented skills and knowledge as a foundation for the electives.
Core Courses (30 credits)
MBA 640 On Ramp (0 credits, pass/fail)
MBA 641 Responsible Manager (3 credits)
MBA 642 Financial Reporting for Responsible Decision Making (3 credits)
MBA 643 Managerial Analytics (3 credits)
MBA 644 Marketing Management (3 credits)
MBA 645 Economics for Organizational Decision Making (3 credits)
MBA 646 Financial Management (3 credits)
MBA 647 Managing People in Organizations (3 credits)
MBA 648 Business Process Management (3 credits)
MBA 649 Strategic Managerial Accounting and Control (3 credits)
MBA 650 Crafting and Implementing Successful Strategies (3 credits)
MBA 640 On Ramp (0 credits)
The On Ramp provides students with the essential tools and basic quantitative skills needed to succeed in the MBA Program and must be completed prior to starting the program. The On Ramp is comprised of two modules: fundamental MBA survival skills and quantitative skills. The quantitative skills module reviews and tests the essential quantitative skills needed prior to starting the program. At the end of the On Ramp, students' quantitative skills are assessed via an examination. Unsuccessful students are required to complete COMM 610 in addition to the regular program requirements. COMM 610 must be successfully completed in the first term of the MBA program. This course is evaluated on a pass/fail basis.
MBA 641 Responsible Manager (3 credits)
Prerequisites: MBA 640 or COMM 610 concurrently.
This introductory course focuses on management, organizations and society. Students reflect on who managers are and what they do, and understand how their work is vital in all the functions of the organization. Taking a multi-level approach acknowledging the individual, organizational, and societal impacts of business, this course critically explores ethical behavior, corporate responsibility and stakeholder engagement. Students develop a more nuanced understanding of what it means to be a responsible manager and the role of business as a vibrant and important actor in society. The pedagogical method is primarily through case analysis.
Notes:
Students are expected to complete MBA 641 in their first term.
Students who have received credit for MBA 691 may not take this course for credit.
MBA 642 Financial Reporting for Responsible Decision Making (3 credits)
Prerequisite: MBA 640 or COMM 610 concurrently.
This course provides an overview of the corporate external financial reporting system. It examines the role played by management, creditors, investors and auditors. The legal environment for enforcing accounting standards is also studied. As financial reporting helps various decision makers allocate resources to the most profitable and socially responsible ventures, annual reports’ comparability is analyzed under existing International and U.S. reporting standards. The pedagogical approach used in this course is based on lectures, case analyses and the discussion of current professional issues, such as triple bottom line accounting and the detection of accounting fraud.
Note: Students who have received credit for MBA 607 may not take this course for credit.
MBA 643 Managerial Analytics (3 credits)
Prerequisites: MBA 640 or COMM 610; MBA 641 previously or concurrently.
This course emphasizes the development of analytical skills needed to work effectively in a business environment. It introduces the basics of knowledge discovery from big data, business analytics and predictive modeling for data driven decision making and policy formation. Topics include exploratory data analysis, statistical analysis and modeling, forecasting and data visualization. Practical usages of the methodologies are demonstrated via projects and case analysis based on big data from various functional areas of business.
Note: Students who have reveived credit for MBA 608 may not take this course for credit.
MBA 644 Marketing Management (3 credits)
Prerequisite: MBA 641 previously or concurrently.
This course focuses on the strategic role of marketing for firms by cultivating marketing management perspectives and skills. Attention is directed toward demonstrating how a manager can use information in micro and macro environments to develop marketing strategies for consumer value creation that integrate product, pricing, promotion, and distribution in order to obtain and maintain a sustainable competitive advantage. Both online and offline aspects of marketing strategies are incorporated to reflect the current environment. Through the use of lectures, case discussions and application-oriented readings, the requisite mindset is nurtured to facilitate marketing excellence in today's multi-faceted and dynamic business environment.
Note: Students who have received credit for MBA 610 may not take this course for credit.
MBA 645: Economics for Organizational Decision Making (3 credits)
Prerequisites: MBA 640 or COMM 610; MBA 641 previously or concurrently.
This course applies the principles and methodologies of economics to the analysis of the global economy and its impact on the domestic business landscape. Students learn how domestic and foreign fiscal and monetary policies influence the performance of national economies through the study of macroeconomic factors such as exchange rates, interest rates, inflation and trade barriers. By the end of the course, students have developed a framework that allows them to identify and assess the systemic risks and opportunities facing any organization. Pedagogical methods may include lectures, cases and/or projects.
Note: Students who have received credit for MBA 618 may not take this course for credit.
MBA 646 Financial Management (3 credits)
Prerequisites: MBA 640 or COMM 610, MBA 642.
This course develops the tools and theories necessary for sound financial and risk management decisions. The core concepts of opportunity cost, risk and return are applied to the practical problems facing financial managers in large and small enterprises.  Specific topics explored in depth include time value of money, security and option valuation, capital budgeting and cost of capital, liquidity management, corporate governance and performance evaluation. Pedagogical tools including lectures, cases/simulations, discussions and applied research are used to present and critique standard and best practices in financial decision making.
Note: Students who have received credit for MBA 614 may not take this course for credit.
MBA 647 Managing People in Organizations (3 credits)
Prerequisite: MBA 640 or COMM 610; MBA 641.
Managing people in today’s organizations requires managers to understand the relationship of and between individual, team, and organizational goals. This course informs students about core concepts that help to explain and predict how people behave in organizations, including discussions of perception, motivation, team dynamics, conflict, stress management, leadership, and change.  Students also learn the science behind selected and critical Human Resource Management practices, including how to train and develop employees, and how to evaluate their performance. Through a combination of lectures and activities (e.g. case discussions, experiential exercises, and projects), students develop the interpersonal, communication, and decision-making skills necessary to manage people effectively and ethically in a diverse and fast-paced business context.
Note: Students who have received credit for MBA 609 may not take this course for credit.
MBA 648 Business Process Management (3 credits)
Prerequisite: MBA 640 or COMM 610, MBA 641.
Business Process Management plays a central role in achieving competitive advantage in terms of quality, price, customer services and product variety. The focus is on improving the performance of core operations by optimally allocating scarce resources. Managerial and analytical tools are studied in improving business processes. The course covers operational issues such as demand management, resource planning, inventory management and quality management. Through case discussion, analysis and spreadsheet modelling, this course provides a hands-on approach to operations management.
Note: Students who have received credit for MBA 616 may not take this course for credit.
MBA 649 Strategic Managerial Accounting and Control (3 credits)
Prerequisites: MBA 640 or COMM 610, MBA 641. MBA 642,
This course focuses on the analytical techniques deployed to assist management in the design, implementation, and monitoring of the organization’s strategy. It also covers techniques, which support the ensuing corrective decision-making. Topics covered include: planning, capital budgeting, master budget, break-even point, differential analysis, product costing, etc. For management control: decentralization systems, transfer pricing, flexible budgets, standard costs and variance analysis, etc. The course uses the case method in both for-profit and not-for-profit organizations.
Note: Students who have received credit for MBA 628 may not take this course for credit.
MBA 650 Crafting and Implementing Successful Strategies (3 credits)
Prerequisites: MBA 641, 644, 645, 646.
The important issues involved in developing strategy in various business sectors are the focus of the course. Students learn to formulate strategies that clearly state the successful and sustainable path for companies. The course also looks at winning strategies defining how companies can compete against their rivals and cooperate with partners in specific business sectors. Students study strategy implementation and examine how functional strategies can be key instruments for business success. The course also looks at the relationship between strategy, culture and structure of the organization. Pedagogical methods focus primarily on cases and projects.
Note: Students who have received credit for MBA 622 may not take this course for credit.
Electives
Elective Courses
Some of these courses may not be available in a given academic year. Special Topics courses are offered by most departments. Detailed information as to availability and content may be obtained from the MBA Program Office.
List of Elective Courses
In addition to the elective courses listed below, MBA students may also take courses in the JMSB MSc programs, or graduate courses offered outside the John Molson School of Business, subject to approval by the MBA Program Director.
Electives: MBA courses
MBA 651 MBA Research Paper (6 credits)
MBA 652 MBA Internship (3 credits)
MBA 654 MBA Reading course
MBA 655 International Case Competition Organizer (6 credits)
MBA 656 International Case Competition – Executive Assistant, Special Projects (6 credits)
MBA 657 International Case Competition – Executive Assistant (3 credits)
MBA 658 Case Competition Organizer (3 credits)
MBA 659 Strategies in Action (Case competition) (3 credits)
MBA 660 Small Business Consulting Bureau (3 credits)
MBA 661 JMSB/MBA Community Services Initiative (3 credits)
MBA 695 Seminar in Special Topics (*) (3 credits)
Notes:
Students who have received credit  for MBA 631 may not take MBA  651 or MBA 655 or MBA 656 for credit.
Students who have received credit for MBA 632 may not take MBA 657 for credit.
Students have received credit for MBA 633 may not take MBA 652 for credit.
Students have received credit for MANA 691 may not take MBA 659 for credit.
Students who have received  credit  for the topic Small Business Consulting Bureau under an MBA 695 number may not take MBA 660 for credit.
Students who have received credit for the topic JMSB/MBA Community Services Initiative under an MBA 695 number may not take MBA 661 for credit.
Accountancy
ACCO 691 Seminar in Business Valuations
ACCO 692 Tax Planning and Decision Making for Managers
ACCO 695 Seminar in Special Topics (*)
Note: Students who have received credit for the topic Tax Planning and Decision Making for Managers under an ACCO 695 number may not take ACCO 692 for credit.
Supply Chain and Business Technology Management
BTM 660 Project Management
BTM 633 Strategic Management of Information Technology
BSTA 645 Statistical Software for Data Management and Analysis
BSTA 677 Business Forecasting
BSTA 678 Data Mining Techniques
SCOM 610 Supply Chain Management
BTM 695 Seminar in Special Topics (*)
Notes:
Students who have received credit for DESC 660 may not take BTM 660 for credit.
Students who have received credit for MBA 615 may not take BTM 633 for credit.
Students who have received credit for the topic Statistical Software for Data Management and Analysis under a DESC 695 number may not take BSTA 645 for credit.
Students who have received credit for DESC 677 may not take BSTA 677 for credit.
Students who have received credit for the topic Data Mining Techniques under a DESC 695 number may not take BSTA 678 for credit.
Students who have received credit for the topic Supply Chain Management under a DESC 695 number may not take SCOM 610 for credit.
Finance
FINA 663 Seminar in Corporate Finance
FINA 664 Private Equity
FINA 665 Mergers and Acquisitions
FINA 682 Seminar in International Financial Management
FINA 683 Seminar in Portfolio Management
FINA 685 Seminar in Options and Futures
FINA 687 Seminar in Derivatives and Risk Management
FINA 688 Financial Risk Management
FINA 690 Investment Analysis
FINA 691 Seminar in Real Estate Finance
FINA 695 Seminar in Special Topics (*)
Notes:
Students who have received credit for the topic Venture Capital under a FINA 695 number may not take FINA 664 for credit.
Students who have received credit for the topic Mergers and Acquisitions under a FINA 695 number may not take FINA 665 for credit.
Students who have received credit for  the topic Financial Risk Management under a FINA 695 number may not take FINA 688 for credit.
Management
MANA 659 Executing Strategies
MANA 664 Seminar in Corporate Law
MANA 665 Management of Change
MANA 667 Corporate Governance
MANA 668 Sustainable Business Strategy
MANA 670 Management Consulting
MANA 681 Seminar in the Management of International Business
MANA 682 Seminar in Human Resources Management
MANA 683 Seminar in Entrepreneurship and Small Business
MANA 695 Seminar in Special Topics (*)
Notes:
Students who have received credit for the topic Management of Change under a MANA 695 number may not take MANA 665 for credit.
Students who have received credit for the topic Corporate Governance under a MANA 695 number may not take MANA 667 for credit.
Students who have received credit for the topic Sustainable Business Strategy under a MANA 695 number may not take MANA 668 for credit.
Students who have received credit for the topic Introduction to Management Consulting under a MANA 695 number may not take MANA 670 for credit.
Marketing
MARK 671 Seminar in Consumer Behaviour
MARK 672 Seminar in Strategic Marketing
MARK 673 Social Media Marketing
MARK 674 Integrated Marketing Communications
MARK 691 Seminar in Pharmaceutical Marketing
MARK 695 Seminar in Special Topics (*)
Notes:
Students who have received credit for the topic Social Media Marketing under a MARK 695 number may not take MARK 673 for credit.
Students who have received credit for the topic Integrated Marketing Communications under a MARK 695 number may not take MARK 674 for credit.
(*) Subject matter will vary from term to term and students may take more than one of these courses, provided that course content has changed.
MBA Co-operative Option
The MBA Co-operative Option is non-credit and is offered to all students who are enrolled in the John Molson MBA Program. Students accepted into the Co-op must be registered as full-time, have completed 24 credits, and maintain a cumulative GPA of 3.30 or better.
Students may do a minimum of one work term (four months) to a maximum of three work terms (twelve months). Students must return to full-time study for their last term.
MSCA 602: Applied Linear Statistical Models (3 credits)
MSCA 615: Research Methodology - Administrative Sciences (3 credits)
15 credits of Supply Chain Management seminars:
MSCM 681: Advanced Modelling and Optimization (3 credits)
MSCM 682: Sourcing and Global Logistics (3 credits)
MSCM 683: Supply Chain Design and Coordination (3 credits)
MSCM 684: Demand Management (3 credits)
MSCM 685: Supply Chain Risk Management (3 credits)
9 credits of elective seminars: (see Elective Seminars)
15 credits: MSCM 689: Applied Research Project
Academic Regulations
Credit Load: Full-time Students. The normal course load for full-time students is 12 credits in each of the terms in the first year; 6 credits and the 15-credit applied research project in the second year.
Credit Load: Part-time Students. The maximum course load for part-time students is 12 credits per calendar year. The 15-credit applied research project should take 6 to 12 months to complete.
Course Reduction. In exceptional circumstances, students may be granted permission to reduce their course load below the normal specified above while remaining in good standing.
Program and Course Withdrawal. Students who wish to apply for withdrawal from the program must do so in writing at the office of the Associate Dean, Research and Research Programs. Students may drop a course up to the end of the course change period. This is normally about two weeks after classes begin (see Academic Calendar). In addition to the regulations which appear in the Graduate Registration section of the Graduate Calendar, students enrolled in the program are required to observe the following rules.
Academic Standing. Please refer to the Academic Standing section of the Calendar for a detailed review of the Academic Regulations.
Time Limit.  Please refer to the Academic Regulation page for further details regarding the Time Limit requirements.
Graduation Requirement. In order to graduate, students must have a minimum cumulative GPA of 2.70.
Elective Seminars
Taking an elective seminar is subject to the academic advisor’s approval. Each year a selection of specialized seminars are offered on a rotating basis from those listed below.
MSCA 625 Seminar in Options and Futures
MSCA 632 Seminar in Special Topics in Finance
MSCA 645 Seminar in Organizational Theory and Design
MSCA 647 Seminar in Strategic Management in Global Context
MSCA 652 Seminar in Special Topics in Management
MSCA 668 Seminar in Innovation and Marketing
MSCA 672 Seminar in Special Topics in Marketing
At most one elective seminar at the graduate level can be taken outside of JMSB.
Qualifying Program
Up to three qualifying program courses are taken by those students who do not have a Supply Chain Management or Industrial Engineering degree. These courses are specified at the time of admission by the Admissions Committee, based on the academic background of the student. The qualifying program courses need to be successfully completed prior to starting the regular master program.
Course Descriptions
Core Seminars
MSCA 602 Applied Linear Statistical Models
The course focuses on systematic treatments of linear statistical models for regression, analysis of variance and experimental design with special emphasis on applications in business and economics. Topics include regression analysis: inference, model building, diagnostics, remedial measures and validation; single-factor and two-factor ANOVA models, and analysis of covariance. Other statistical tools for specialized applications discussed may include logistic regression, path analysis and time series regression. Case studies are employed to illustrate tools for fitting, checking, validating and interpreting linear models.
MSCA 615 Research Methodology - Administrative Sciences
This seminar provides a basic understanding of the research process and a knowledge of the methods used in the design and execution of scientific research relevant to social sciences, and specifically the business context. The seminar helps students to develop skills needed to assess the feasibility and potential contribution of proposed studies, and to critically evaluate research reported by others. The application of relevant research methods are reviewed through discussions of exemplary articles published in leading journals. Cornerstone topics in this seminar include: theory construction, measurement, overview of data collection methods, reliability, as well as internal and external validity issues.
Note: Students who have taken MSCA 612, MSCA 613 or MSCA 614 may not take this seminar for credit.
Supply Chain Management Seminars
MSCM 681 Advanced Modelling and Optimization
This seminar emphasizes the theoretical and practical aspects of advanced optimization modelling techniques in supply chain planning. Among the topics covered are network optimization, non-linear programming, stochastic programming, Markov processes and application of duality in developing decomposition-based solution approaches for large linear and integer models. Use of commercial modelling platform and optimization software are an integral part of this seminar.
MSCM 682 Sourcing and Global Logistics
This seminar covers the practices, techniques and regulations associated with sourcing and movement of materials in the global supply chains. Among the topics covered on sourcing are impact of globalization on sourcing, supplier evaluation and selection, supplier performance management, purchasing, electronic procurement, negotiations, contract law, supplier relationship management. Issues in global logistics are discussed in the second half of the seminar. Among the topics covered are distribution channels, warehousing, transportation management, reverse logistics, green logistics and sustainability, and cross-border issues in logistics. The coverage is supplemented by case studies and research articles.
MSCM 683 Supply Chain Design and Coordination
Prerequisite: MSCM 681 or equivalent.
This seminar focuses on managerial and modelling issues in supply chain design and coordination along the supply chain. Models in facility location, distribution networks and global supply chain networks are studied. The strategic aspects of supply chain design are discussed in terms of competitive drivers. The second part of the seminar deals with coordination issues. Among the concepts and models covered in this respect are supply chain contracts, collaborative planning, forecasting and replenishment, bullwhip effect, postponement, and vendor managed inventory. Articles, case studies, optimization software and simulation game are used as part of seminar delivery.
MSCM 684 Demand Management
The seminar presents advanced forecasting tools that assist market analysis, revenue management tools that optimize operational performance and approaches in building flexibilities to enhance manufacturing and organizational capabilities. Among the topics covered are advanced forecasting models, judgmental forecasting and adjustment, customer relationship management, consumer choice models, dynamic pricing, capacity control, network revenue management, manufacturing and organizational flexibilities. The seminar content is delivered via a combination of lectures, case analyses and research articles.
MSCM 685 Supply Chain Risk Management
Prerequisite: MSCM 681 or equivalent.
Strategies for managing the various risks along the supply chain are studied. Quantitative and qualitative approaches used in analyzing such risks and scenarios are covered. The seminar discusses risk identification and management, trade-offs in risk management, strategies for robustness, scenario planning, financial risks and disruption planning. The approaches used for modelling and analyzing the supply chain risks are presented through lectures, case analyses and research articles.
MSCM 689 Applied Research Project
Prerequisite: at least nine credits of MSCM seminars.
Supervised (co-supervised) by a faculty member(s), the applied research project is carried out individually or by a group of two students, depending on the overall requirements and the extent of the project to be conducted. The project involves working on a real-life supply chain management problem provided by a company. Once the problem is defined, the students prepare an overall project management plan to tackle the problem within a given time limit. The various stages of the project involve, among others: literature review, defining data and information requirements for problem analysis, gathering data, designing the appropriate model, conducting experimental design runs and sensitivity analyses, and presenting the solution(s) with an implementation plan. The project outcome is expected to have both academic and business merit. For projects done in groups of two students, there is a significant individual evaluation component in assessing the work done by each student.
GDBA 530 Business Data Analytics (3 credits)
This course provides students with the skills and knowledge needed to analyze business data. Using spreadsheet software throughout the course, students learn to summarize and describe data with charts, graphs and numbers, to visualize and measure relationships in data and acquire the ability to make inferences and predictions. Students acquire a working knowledge of the statistical tools and techniques required for better decision making. The course combines lecturing with actual business applications and class discussions aimed at encouraging critical thinking, analytical skills and ethical manipulation and reporting of data.
Note 1: Students who have successfully completed a statistics course in a previous program with a minimum grade of “B” may be exempt from taking GDBA 530 with the permission of the Program Director. In this case, the course must be substituted with an elective.
Note 2: Students who have received credit for GDBA 502 may not take this course for credit.
GDBA 531 Professional Business Skills (3 credits)
This course provides students with the necessary skills that help with successful interaction with others in business settings. Topics include designing and delivering effective written and oral messages from concept to delivery, working in groups, and negotiating and resolving conflict by using ethical communication tactics. Pedagogical methods include group-based work, in-class workshops, case studies, presentations and report writing.
GDBA 532 Accounting (3 credits)
This course surveys financial and managerial accounting from the point of view of the users of financial information. Financial accounting topics include the framework of financial accounting, the analysis of transactions, and the preparation and analysis of financial statements. Topics in management accounting are budgeting and control, costing and cost allocation, the cost-volume-profit planning model, and short-term and long-term decision making in business. The ethical dimensions of accounting are explored throughout the course. Pedagogical methods include lectures, exercises, case studies and class discussions.
Note: Students who have received credit for GDBA 501 may not take this course for credit.
GDBA 533 Managing People in Organizations (3 credits)
Prerequisites: GDBA 531 previously or concurrently.
This course is concerned with understanding and managing individual and group behaviour in organizations. It examines themes such as personality, motivation, emotions, leadership, ethics, and group dynamics and how they relate to the role of managers in organizations. The course covers these topics in an integrated manner so as to prepare students to become effective managers. Pedagogical methods include in-class exercises and case studies.
Note: Students who have received credit for GDBA 503 may not take this course for credit.
GDBA 534 Marketing Management (3 credits)
Prerequisites: GDBA 531 previously or concurrently.
This course is designed to provide students with the necessary skills to develop a marketing plan.  Topics include micro- and macro-level environmental analysis, customer behaviour, market segmentation, value generating practices and developing a complete marketing plan. Pedagogical methods include lectures, case studies and in-class presentations.
Note: Students who have received credit for GDBA 504 may not take this course for credit.
GDBA 535 Finance (3 credits)
Prerequisites: GDBA 530 previously or concurrently, and 532.
This course provides students with a general understanding of the fundamental concepts of finance as they apply to financial management and investment analysis.  Building on the objective of firm value maximization, students learn to describe and value risky financial securities and long-term capital projects as well as to manage the firm’s short-term financial planning and decisions. Pedagogical methods include exercises, cases, simulations and class discussions.
Note: Students who have received credit for GDBA 505 may not take this course for credit.
GDBA 536 Operations Management (3 credits)
Prerequisites: GDBA 530 previously or concurrently.
This course provides students with the quantitative and qualitative techniques to achieve efficient and effective utilization of scarce resources in business. Topics include planning, management and control of labour, machinery, material, money, information and time resources in manufacturing and service sectors. Recent developments in these areas are introduced within the context of manufacturing and service strategies. The course uses class discussion, case analysis and simulation to illustrate key concepts and practices in operations management. The interactions with other functional areas, such as information systems, marketing, accounting and finance are discussed through case studies.
Note: Students who have received credit for GDBA 506 may not take this course for credit.
GDBA 537 Managerial Economics (3 credits)
Prerequisites: GDBA 530 previously or concurrently.
This course introduces the principles of economics.  The emphasis is on the role of the decision maker who has to identify and implement profitable decisions.  The course applies economic reasoning to business problems including bargaining, adverse selection, moral hazard, and incentive alignment. Pedagogical methods include exercises, cases and class discussions.
Note: Students who have received credit for GDBA 507 may not take this course for credit.
GDBA 538 Strategic Management (3 credits)
Prerequisites: 12 credits including GDBA 530 and 531.
This capstone course provides students with an understanding of how firms gain and sustain competitive advantage in various business sectors. Specific topics include industry environment analysis, internal analysis of firm resources and capabilities, the analysis of business and corporate level strategies, and various strategic alternatives such as mergers and acquisitions, strategic alliances, and internationalization strategies. The course uses case analysis as the main approach to build abilities in strategic analysis and decision making.
GDBA 540 Entrepreneurship (3 credits)
Students conduct a market study and develop a complete business plan, including the operational, financial and marketing plan. Topics may include: transforming an idea into a business, analyzing the market and competition, and planning operations and finances for the next three to five years. Pedagogical methods include lectures, case studies, and the development of a business plan.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under GDBA 595 may not take this course for credit.
GDBA 541 Business Law (3 credits)
Students learn the basic principles of the Quebec legal system, the various methods available to start a new business and how to select the most appropriate form of business. Students also learn basic legal notions relating to contracts, civil liability and employment law allowing them to better understand these legal principles in the context of operating a business.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under GDBA 595 may not take this course for credit.
GDBA 590 Special Topics in Accountancy (3 credits)
Note: Students who have received credit for the same topic under GDBA 595 may not take this course for credit.
GDBA 591 Special Topics in Finance (3 credits)
Note: Students who have received credit for the same topic under GDBA 595 may not take this course for credit.
GDBA 592 Special Topics in Management (3 credits)
Note: Students who have received credit for the same topic under GDBA 595 may not take this course for credit.
GDBA 593 Special Topics in Marketing (3 credits)
Note: Students who have received credit for the same topic under GDBA 595 may not take this course for credit.
GDBA 594 Special Topics in Supply Chain and Business Technology Management (3 credits)
Note: Students who have received credit for the same topic under GDBA 595 may not take this course for credit.
GDBA 595 Special Topics (3 credits)
Special topics for this course are stated in the Class Schedule.
ACCO 650 Financial Reporting in Practice (4 credits)
The objective of this course is for the student to demonstrate a high level of competency in many financial accounting and reporting issues, within alternative accounting frameworks. Students are also introduced to the integration of several other competencies, including taxation and finance which help develop the student’s understanding of the implications of financial statement preparation on their users.
Note: Students who have taken ACCO 612 and ACCO 643 may not take this course for credit.
ACCO 651 Financial Reporting: Comprehensive Applications (4 credits)
In conjunction with ACCO 650, this course covers several additional complex issues in financial accounting and reporting, within alternative accounting frameworks. Students apply these financial accounting and reporting competencies, along with other competencies, in a case context.
Note: Students who have taken ACCO 613 may not take this course for credit.
ACCO 652 Business Advisory Services (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ACCO 650.
This course is designed to develop competencies in management decision making, finance, strategy and risk management. Emphasis is placed on strategy formulation, implementation and monitoring using case analysis.
Note: Students who have taken ACCO 631 may not take this course for credit.
ACCO 653 Information Systems and Internal Control (4 credits)
Prerequisites: ACCO 650, 651.
In conjunction with ACCO 652, this course is designed to develop skills in corporate governance with emphasis on the competencies required to build good internal control systems and to assess its impact on financial reporting.
Note: Students who have taken ACCO 678 may not take this course for credit.
ACCO 658 Capstone I Seminar (2 credits)
Prerequisites: ACCO 650, 651, 652, 653 and two elective courses.
This course is designed to enhance the development of the student as a strategic thinker. The course builds on all previously acquired competencies. The content, structure and delivery of the course are designed to develop the strategic leadership capabilities of the student and ensure an integrative perspective is brought to decision making. The course combines individual and group work, in both written assignments and oral presentations.
Note: There is a surcharge for this course.
ACCO 659 Capstone II Examination Preparation (4 credits)
Co-rerequisite: ACCO 658.
In this course, the students work individually to solve complex and highly integrative cases that simulate real-life business issues. The course draws on all competencies acquired throughout the CPA program and is designed specifically for students intending to write the CPA Canada Common Final Examination (CFE).
Note: There is a surcharge for this course.
Elective Courses
Students must choose two of the following four courses, depending on their interests and career aspirations. Students who plan to practice public accounting must take ACCO 654 and ACCO 655.
ACCO 654 Assurance and Professional Practice (4 credits)
Prerequisites: ACCO 650, 651, 653.
The objective of this course is to develop the competencies necessary to perform both internal audit projects and external assurance engagements. Students use cases to assess the kind of engagement required, to develop and perform procedures, and to document and report results obtained from a risk-based perspective.
Note: Students who have taken ACCO 635 may not take this course for credit.
ACCO 655 Taxation and Decision Making (4 credits)
Prerequisites: ACCO 650, 651.
This course is designed to develop competencies necessary to provide a broad range of taxation services and advice to individuals, corporations, partnerships and trusts, in compliance with tax laws and regulations. Students develop additional knowledge of the relationship between financial reporting decisions and taxation, as well as the role of taxation in making business and investment decisions.
Note: Students who have taken ACCO 643 may not take this course for credit.
ACCO 656 Performance Management (4 credits)
Prerequisites: ACCO 652, 653.
The objective of this course is to enhance the student’s ability to assess and contribute to overall performance management, by developing and analyzing strategic decision making, supporting effective governance, managing and mitigating risk. It builds on skills developed primarily within the core courses.
ACCO 657 Financial Strategies and Decisions (4 credits)
Prerequisites: ACCO 651, 652.
In this course, students build upon finance-related material from previous courses to provide finance-related services for their organizations. To understand and communicate with other finance professionals, studentds identify, analyze, evaluate and recommend investment and financing strategies and make decisions, either individually or as part of a larger team.
Tutorial Courses
ACCO 600 Tutorial in Financial Reporting in Practice (4 credits)
Prerequisites: ACCO 650 and permission of the program director.
This course is designed to enhance the competencies of students in the program who will benefit from additional exposure to the subject matter covered in ACCO 650.
The objective is for the student to demonstrate a high level of competency in many financial accounting and reporting issues, within alternative accounting frameworks. Students are also introduced to the integration of several other competencies, including taxation and finance which help develop the student’s understanding of the implications of financial statement preparation on their users. This course is evaluated on the same basis as ACCO 650, in the term the course is taken.
Note: Students who have taken ACCO 650T may not take this course for credit.
ACCO 601 Tutorial in Financial Reporting: Comprehensive Applications (4 credits)
Prerequisites: ACCO 651 and permission of the program director.
TThis course is designed to enhance the competencies of students in the program who will benefit from additional exposure to the subject matter covered in ACCO 651. In conjunction with ACCO 650, this course covers several additional complex issues in financial accounting and reporting, within alternative accounting frameworks. Students apply these financial accounting and reporting competencies, along with other competencies, in a case context. This course is evaluated on the same basis as ACCO 651, in the term the course is taken.
Note: Students who have taken ACCO 651T may not take this course for credit.
ACCO 602 Tutorial in Business Advisory Services (4 credits)
Prerequisites: ACCO 652 and permission of the program director.
This course is designed to enhance the competencies of students in the program who will benefit from additional exposure to the subject matter covered in ACCO 652. Students develop competencies in management decision making, finance, strategy and risk management. Emphasis is placed on strategy formulation, implementation and monitoring using case analysis. This course is evaluated on the same basis as ACCO 652, in the term the course was taken.
Note: Students who have taken ACCO 652T may not take this course for credit.
ACCO 603 Tutorial in Information Systems and Internal Control (4 credits)
Prerequisites: ACCO 653 and permission of the program director.
This course is designed to enhance the competencies of students in the program who will benefit from additional exposure to the subject matter covered in ACCO 653. In conjunction with ACCO 652, this course develops skills in corporate governance with emphasis on the competencies required to build good internal control systems and to assess its impact on financial reporting. This course is evaluated on the same basis as ACCO 653, in the term the course is taken.
Note: Students who have taken ACCO 653T may not take this course for credit.
ACCO 604 Tutorial in Assurance and Professional Practice (4 credits)
Prerequisites: ACCO 654 and permission of the program director.
This course is designed to enhance the competencies of students in the program who will benefit from additional exposure to the subject matter covered in ACCO 654. The objective is to develop the competencies necessary to perform both internal audit projects and external assurance engagements. Students use cases to assess the kind of engagement required, to develop and perform procedures, and to document and report results obtained from a risk-based perspective. This course is evaluated on the same basis as ACCO 654, in the term the course is taken.
Note: Students who have taken ACCO 654T may not take this course for credit.
ACCO 605 Tutorial in Taxation and Decision Making (4 credits)
Prerequisites: ACCO 655 and permission of the program director.
This course is designed to enhance the competencies of students in the program who will benefit from additional exposure to the subject matter covered in ACCO 655. Included are the competencies necessary to provide a broad range of taxation services and advice to individuals, corporations, partnerships and trusts, in compliance with tax laws and regulations. Students develop additional knowledge of the relationship between financial reporting decisions and taxation, as well as the role of taxation in making business and investment decisions. This course is evaluated on the same basis as ACCO 655, in the term the course is taken.
Note: Students who have taken ACCO 655T may not take this course for credit.
ACCO 606 Tutorial in Performance Management (4 credits)
Prerequisites: ACCO 656 and permission of the program director.
This course is designed to enhance the competencies of students in the program who will benefit from additional exposure to the subject matter covered in ACCO 656. The objective is to enhance the student’s ability to assess and contribute to overall performance management, by developing and analyzing strategic decision making, supporting effective governance, managing and mitigating risk. It builds on skills developed primarily within the core courses. This course is evaluated on the same basis as ACCO 656, in the term the course is taken.
Note: Students who have taken ACCO 656T may not take this course for credit.
ACCO 607 Tutorial in Financial Strategies and Decisions (4 credits)
Prerequisites: ACCO 657 and permission of the program director.
This course is designed to enhance the competencies of students in the program who will benefit from additional exposure to the subject matter covered in ACCO 657. Students build upon finance-related material from previous courses to provide finance-related services for their organizations. To understand and communicate with other finance professionals, students identify, analyze, evaluate and recommend investment and financing strategies, and make decisions, either individually or as part of a larger team. This course is evaluated on the same basis as ACCO 657, in the term the course is taken.
Note: Students who have taken ACCO 657T may not take this course for credit.
ACCO 608 Tutorial in Capstone I Seminar (2 credits)
Prerequisites: ACCO 658 and permission of the program director.
This course is designed to enhance the competencies of students in the program who will benefit from additional exposure to the subject matter covered in ACCO 658. The objective is to develop the student as a strategic thinker and build on all previously acquired competencies. The content, structure and delivery of the course are designed to develop the strategic leadership capabilities of the student and ensure an integrative perspective is brought to decision making. The course combines individual and group work, in both written assignments and oral presentations. This course is evaluated on the same basis as ACCO 658, in the term the course is taken.
Note 1: There is a surcharge for this course.
Note 2: Students who have taken ACCO 658T may not take this course for credit.
ACCO 609 Tutorial in Capstone II Examination Preparation (4 credits)
Prerequisites: ACCO 659 and permission of the program director.
This course is designed to enhance the competencies of students in the program who will benefit from additional exposure to the subject matter covered in ACCO 659. The students work individually to solve complex and highly integrative cases that simulate real-life business issues. The course draws on all competencies acquired throughout the CPA program and is designed specifically for students intending to write the CPA Canada Common Final Examination (CFE). This course is evaluated on the same basis as ACCO 659, in the term the course is taken.
Note 1: There is a surcharge for this course.
Note 2: Students who have taken ACCO 659T may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 610 Economics (3 credits)
This course will examine the theoretical basis and investment implications of macroeconomic and microeconomic principles, including the key components of economic activity, industrial organization, macro theory and policy, international trade, and exchange rates.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 610, MIM 610, or IMBA 610 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 611 Financial Statement Analysis I (3 credits)
This course will examine the fundamental financial statements and the impact of different accounting principles on those statements. The course will examine the treatment of such items as income taxes, inventories, depreciation, and leases from the perspective of the investment analyst. International differences in accounting standards will also be examined.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 611, MIM 611, or IMBA 611 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 613 Asset Pricing and Portfolio Management I (1.5 credits)
This course will examine the efficient markets hypothesis and introduce the classic asset pricing models (domestic and international). The key elements of the theory and practice of the portfolio management process, including investment policy, asset allocation, and client relations will be examined in the domestic and international context.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 613, MIM 613, or IMBA 613 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 614 Security Valuation in the Domestic and International Environment (3 credits)
This course will examine security (equity and fixed income) risk and valuation (for companies and industries) using alternative methodologies. The characteristics of global financial markets and the implications for security valuation will be examined. The theory and analysis of derivative securities will be introduced.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 614, MIM 614, or IMBA 614 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 615 CFA® Exam Preparation Course Level I (1.5 credits)
This course will review the material needed for the Level I CFA® exam. Successful completion of this course includes passing the CFA® Level I Exam.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 615, MIM 615, or IMBA 615 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 616 Quantitative Techniques (3 credits)
This course will examine the nature of the models used in the valuation and evaluation of investments, the theoretical and practical use of these models, comparison of classical or traditional models based on statistical analysis versus those based on more recent developments.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 612, MIM 612, IMBA 612, DIM 616, MIM 616, or IMBA 616 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 617 Corporate Finance (1.5 credits)
This module covers the theory and practice of corporate finance with emphasis on concepts such as cash flow, liquidity, leverage, cost of capital, project evaluation, and dividend policy.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 612, MIM 612, IMBA 612, DIM 617, MIM 617, or IMBA 617 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 618 Seminar in Corporate Finance (3 credits)
Prerequisite: For MIM and GIIM MBA Students: GIIM 615 or DIM 615 or MIM 615 or IMBA 615.
This course focuses on the application of modern finance theory to corporate decisions. It examines the firm’s investment and financial decisions under various economic and financial conditions. Specific topics include mergers and acquisitions, leverage buyout decisions and dividend and equity management strategies.
Note: Students who have taken MIM 618 or IMBA 618 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 619 Marketing Management (3 credits)
The main goal of this course is to develop a comprehensive understanding of the strategic role of marketing within the firm and within the Canadian context. It covers all aspects of the marketing management process. This course is designed to help develop the necessary skills to analyze market opportunities, research and select target markets, design effective marketing strategies, plan marketing programs, and organize, implement and control the marketing effort. The specificities of the marketing of services and their implications in terms of marketing strategies are emphasized.
GIIM 620 Financial Statement Analysis II (3 credits)
Prerequisite: For MIM and GIIM MBA students: GIIM 615 or DIM 615 or MIM 615 or IMBA 615.
This course examines the analysis and use of financial statements and disclosures in the investment valuation process, as well as the impact of international differences and managerial choice on the financial statements.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 620, MIM 620, or IMBA 620 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 621 Fixed Income Analysis (1.5 credits)
Prerequisite: For MIM and GIIM MBA students: GIIM 615 or DIM 615 or MIM 615 or IMBA 615.
This course deals with the risk and return characteristics of debt instruments, term structure of interest rates, valuation of securities with embedded derivative securities or other unique features. The unique features of real estate and private equity investments are also covered.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 621, MIM 621, or IMBA 621 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 622 Derivatives (3 credits)
Prerequisite: For MIM and GIIM MBA students: GIIM 615 or DIM 615 or MIM 615 or IMBA 615.
This course focuses on the theory and practice of futures, swaps and option valuation.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 622, MIM 622, or IMBA 622 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 623 Asset Pricing and Portfolio Management II (1.5 credits)
Prerequisite: For MIM and GIIM MBA students: GIIM 615 or DIM 615 or MIM 615 or IMBA 615.
This course analyzes the theory and critically evaluates the empirical evidence regarding asset pricing models. Implications for the correlation structure of returns and the impact on risk and return forecasting are also covered. This course discusses the role of alternative portfolio management philosophies and their implications for asset valuations and portfolio performance evaluation. Topics include the use and role of quantitative methods in the evaluation and forecasting of investment performance as well as the implications of asset pricing model predictions and failures for portfolio management.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 623, MIM 623, or IMBA 623 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 624 Analysis of Equity Investments (3 credits)
Prerequisite: For MIM and GIIM MBA students: GIIM 615 or DIM 615 or MIM 615 or IMBA 615.
This course reviews the use of fundamental analysis and other methodologies to generate investment valuations and risk analyses. The impact of special situations on the valuation process and the valuation of equity derivative securities will be examined.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 624, MIM 624, or IMBA 624 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 625 CFA® Exam Preparation Course Level II (non-credit)
Prerequisite: GIIM 615, DIM 615, MIM 615 or IMBA 615.
This course will review the material needed for the Level II CFA® exam. Permission of the Program is required to register for this course.
GIIM 626 Organizational Behaviour (3 credits)
This course focuses on individual and group behavior and the interactions of behavioural phenomena. Concepts such as motivation, leadership, group behaviour and managing change in organizations are examined. Students acquire an understanding of change processes and skills relating to organizational diagnosis and change.
GIIM 631 Asset Allocation and Performance Measurement (3 credits)
Prerequisite: GIIM 625, DIM 625, MIM 625, or IMBA 625.
This course will examine the estimation of expected returns and risks for asset classes and individual assets, the development of strategies for managing portfolios of domestic and foreign securities (equity, fixed income, real estate, etc.), the management of portfolio risk, and the evaluation of portfolio and manager performance.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 631, MIM 631, IMBA 631, DIM 632, MIM 632, or IMBA 632 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 633 Investment Law and Ethics (3 credits)
Prerequisite: For MIM and GIIM MBA students: GIIM 625 or DIM 625 or MIM 625 or IMBA 625.
This course covers issues regarding the management of investment funds including techniques for the identification and prevention of professional misconduct, and the nature and drafting of compliance procedures. The practice of portfolio management and investment valuation are studied through the use of topical cases.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 633, MIM 633, or IMBA 633 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 634 CFA® Exam Preparation Course Level III (non-credit)
Prerequisite: GIIM 625, DIM 625, MIM 625, or IMBA 625.
This course will review the material needed for the Level III CFA® exam. Permission of the Program is required to register for this course.
GIIM 636 Alternative Investments (1.5 credits)
Prerequisite: GIIM 625, DIM 625, MIM 625, or IMBA 625.
This course will cover a description of investments such as hedge funds, real estate and the private equity market.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 621, MIM 621, IMBA 621, MIM 636, or IMBA 636 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 637 Strategic Management (3 credits)
This course integrates the core functional disciplines of business within a strategic perspective and introduces several strategic management concepts, including industry analysis and dynamics, the organizational resource audit, strategic typologies, the role of the general manager, and the management of strategic transformations. The principal goal is to develop and enhance student ability in problem identification, environmental and organizational analysis, strategic alternative formulation, and action implementation. The pedagogy of the course is based upon comprehensive case studies that deal with strategic issues in a variety of contemporary business contexts.
GIIM 653 Seminar in Investment Analysis and Management (3 credits)
Prerequisite: GIIM 625, DIM 625, MIM 625, or IMBA 625.
This course will concentrate heavily on portfolio risk management issues. Topics such as the effect of cash drag, the use of equity and debt derivatives to manage risk and the uses and abuses of value at risk (VAR) will be explored. Other topics include equity style and its importance index funds and relevant criteria for the selection of investment managers.
Note: Students who have taken MIM 653 or IMBA 653 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 654 Seminar in International Investment Analysis and Management (3 credits)
Prerequisite: GIIM 625, DIM 625, MIM 625, or IMBA 625.
This course begins with a discussion of exchange rates and to what extent economic factors and market sentiment are important in the determination of these rates. Issues of importance that international investors face will be examined along with the benefits of international diversification. The course will conclude with the analysis of issues relevant to emerging markets and factors that would influence the construction of a portfolio that may include an emerging market component.
Note: Students who have taken MIM 654 or IMBA 654 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 655 Socially Responsible and Sustainable Investment (3 credits)
The aim of this course is to provide students with a knowledge of socially responsible investment related issues that transcend the modern portfolio theory of Markowitz. Students gain an understanding of sustainable and responsible investment. They also develop the ability to uncover non-traditional risk and return drivers. Relevant case studies and a series of readings are relied upon to provide the basis for the course.
GIIM 695 Special Topics in Investment Management (3 credits)
Note: When offered, this course may substitute a GIIM required core course, for which students must obtain approval of the Program Director in order to register.
GDBA 531 Professional Business Skills (3 credits)
This course provides students with the necessary skills that help with successful interaction with others in business settings. Topics include designing and delivering effective written and oral messages from concept to delivery, working in groups, and negotiating and resolving conflict by using ethical communication tactics. Pedagogical methods include group-based work, in-class workshops, case studies, presentations and report writing.
GDBA 532 Accounting (3 credits)
This course surveys financial and managerial accounting from the point of view of the users of financial information. Financial accounting topics include the framework of financial accounting, the analysis of transactions, and the preparation and analysis of financial statements. Topics in management accounting are budgeting and control, costing and cost allocation, the cost-volume-profit planning model, and short-term and long-term decision making in business. The ethical dimensions of accounting are explored throughout the course. Pedagogical methods include lectures, exercises, case studies and class discussions.
Note: Students who have received credit for GDBA 501 may not take this course for credit.
GDBA 533 Managing People in Organizations (3 credits)
Prerequisites: GDBA 531 previously or concurrently.
This course is concerned with understanding and managing individual and group behaviour in organizations. It examines themes such as personality, motivation, emotions, leadership, ethics, and group dynamics and how they relate to the role of managers in organizations. The course covers these topics in an integrated manner so as to prepare students to become effective managers. Pedagogical methods include in-class exercises and case studies.
Note: Students who have received credit for GDBA 503 may not take this course for credit.
GDBA 534 Marketing Management (3 credits)
Prerequisites: GDBA 531 previously or concurrently.
This course is designed to provide students with the necessary skills to develop a marketing plan.  Topics include micro- and macro-level environmental analysis, customer behaviour, market segmentation, value generating practices and developing a complete marketing plan. Pedagogical methods include lectures, case studies and in-class presentations.
Note: Students who have received credit for GDBA 504 may not take this course for credit.
GCE 511 Starting your Own Business (3 credits)
This course provides students with essential business knowledge. It covers the basic principles of self-employment and management of a micro-enterprise such as an artist-run studio, design firm, or a professional practice. Students learn how to organize and finance their new venture, set up basic accounting structures, understand tax implications, and protect their intellectual property. Pedagogical methods include lectures and case studies.
GCE 512 Marketing your Own Busines (3 credits)
Prerequisite: GCE 511 previously or concurrently.
This course focuses on entrepreneurial marketing for the micro-enterprise. Students learn how to strategize, plan and implement marketing programs in both online and offline environments. They also learn how to tailor these programs to address the needs of their audiences and customers and how to align their business accordingly. Topics include opportunity identification, demand generation, value pricing, promotion, channel decisions, and developing a marketing mindset. Pedagogical methods include lectures, case studies, class discussions and the development of a marketing plan.
GCE 513 Growing your Own Business (3 credits)
Prerequisite: GCE 511 oreviously or concurrently.
This course adds to the knowledge acquired in GCE 511. It covers the issues that will arise as a micro-enterprise grows. Topics include strategies for achieving and sustaining growth, hiring and supervising staff, selecting software applications and protecting sensitive information. Pedagogical methods include lectures and case studies.
GCE 514 Entrepreneurship: Venture Creation (3 credits)
Prerequisites: GCE 511, 512, 513 previously or concurrently.
This capstone course is designed to guide students in conducting a market study and developing their complete business plan including their operational and financial plans and integrating the marketing plan. Topics include: transforming their idea into a business, analyzing the market and competition, and planning operations and finances for the next three to five years. Pedagogical methods include lectures, case studies, and the development of the business plan.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under GDBA 595 may not take this course for credit.
GCE 595 Special Topics (3 credits)
Special topics for this course are stated in the Class Schedule.
INDI 800-819 Doctoral Level Studies (6 credits)
INDI 820-839 Doctoral Level Studies (3 credits)
INDI 840-884 Doctoral Level Studies (variable credits)
INDI 885 Doctoral Comprehensive Examination (3 credits)
INDI 886 Special Topics (3 credits)
This optional seminar addresses a topic or range of topics of relevance to the research interests of a cross-section of the students enrolled in the program.
INDI 887 Doctoral Thesis Proposal (3 credits)
INDI 890 Doctoral Research and Thesis (66 credits)
INDI 898 Doctoral Directed Research Course (variable credits)
The student conducts research in a lab or another research site under the direction of his/her principal supervisor.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. INDI 898A, INDI 898B, etc. These courses will be graded pass/fail.
INDI 899 International Doctoral Level Studies (3 credits)
Comprehensive Examination
At the doctoral level, students are required to write an examination testing their basic knowledge of the relevant areas of each component discipline comprising their program of study. The comprehensive examination takes place after students have completed the required 18 course credits. For most students, the format will involve three written examination questions. Students who are involved in a research-creation project may include a practice-based component as one of their examination questions.
The student and supervisory committee, comprised of three faculty members, meet prior to the comprehensive exam to determine the format of the exam and the evaluation mechanism, as well as to approve a reading list of approximately 20 titles per question. The student has two weeks to complete the examination (responses are typically 1600-2400 words per question). The student submits the completed exam within the given timeframe to the INDI Coordinator. The student's supervisory committee evaluates the examination, and the principal supervisor submits the evaluations along with the pass/fail grade to the INDI Coordinator. Students who fail their comprehensive exam will be given one opportunity to rewrite the exam.
Following the exam, the student meets with the supervisory committee to discuss the results of the exam and plans for the thesis proposal.
Thesis
A thesis in an Individualized Program represents a unique contribution to scholarship undertaken while the student is enrolled in the program. The doctoral theses offered at this University in cognate areas will normally provide an appropriate guide to the format and scope of the Individualized Program thesis requirements.
In the case of a nontraditional thesis – such as one involving a creative production – the requirement of scholarly contribution still applies. Thus, while a thesis may present a creative work as its central focus, it should nevertheless provide a scholarly discussion placing that work in the context of related ideas and works. As in the case of traditional theses, the nontraditional thesis is submitted to an oral examination where it is exposed to scholarly criticism and where the student is given an opportunity to defend it.
The thesis defence must provide for the inclusion of one external examiner at the doctoral level.
INDI 600-619 Master’s Level Studies (6 credits)
INDI 620-639 Master’s Level Studies (3 credits)
INDI 640-684 Master’s Level Studies (variable credits)
INDI 686 Special Topics (3 credits)
This optional seminar addresses a topic or range of topics of relevance to the research interests of a cross-section of the students enrolled in the program.
INDI 687 Master’s Thesis Proposal (3 credits)
INDI 690 Master’s Research and Thesis (24 credits)
INDI 698 Master’s Directed Research Course (variable credits)
The student conducts research in a lab or another research site under the direction of his/her principal supervisor.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. INDI 698A, INDI 698B, etc. These courses will be graded pass/fail.
INDI 699 International Master’s Level Studies (3 credits)
Thesis
A thesis in an Individualized Program represents a unique contribution to scholarship undertaken while the student is enrolled in the program. The master's theses offered at this University in cognate areas will normally provide an appropriate guide to the format and scope of the Individualized Program thesis requirements.
In the case of a nontraditional thesis – such as one involving a creative production – the requirement of scholarly contribution still applies. Thus, while a thesis may present a creative work as its central focus, it should nevertheless provide a scholarly discussion placing that work in the context of related ideas and works. As in the case of traditional theses, the nontraditional thesis is submitted to an oral examination where it is exposed to scholarly criticism and where the student is given an opportunity to defend it.
At the master's level, the thesis defence will include the student's principal supervisor and at least two other committee members, one of whom may be an external examiner.
ETEC 613 Learning Theories (3 credits)
The primary goal of the course is for students to develop a critical understanding of classic and contemporary theories of learning, such as behaviourism, cognitivism, neo-cognitivism, and socio-constructivism as they inform instructional practice. Secondary course goals include enhancing students' abilities to: a) read and evaluate the primary literature in the area; b) present and write within the discipline; c) evaluate applications of theory to practice; and d) collaborate professionally including via computer conferencing.
UNIT 601 Teaching and Learning in Higher Education (3 credits)
This seminar course is designed as a survey at an advanced level of the theory and practice of higher education pedagogy through an examination of the existing literature. Topics may include but are not limited to student learning assessment, course design, teaching strategies, student diversity, technology in the classroom and reflective practice.
UNIT 602 Development of a University Course (3 credits)
Prerequisite: ETEC 613, UNIT 601.
In this directed study course, students develop the objectives, outline, content, notes, assignments, and assessment plan for the course that they will teach during UNIT 603, Internship in University Teaching. The prepared materials are evaluated by the students’ teaching mentor. This course is graded on a pass/fail basis.
Note: Normally, this course will be one available via the graduate calendar or as a slot course, and not a new course which would require curriculum approval.
UNIT 603 Internship in University Teaching (6 credits)
Prerequisite: ETEC 613, UNIT 601 and 602.
This internship requires students to teach one 3-credit university course in their discipline using the materials developed in UNIT 602, Development of a University Course. Students develop a teaching portfolio which includes a teaching statement, an explanation of pedagogical practices used in the course, self-evaluation of the teaching, students’ evaluations of the course, and a plan for improvements to the course content and teaching practices. This internship is graded on a pass/fail basis.
AHSC 610 Group Process Intervention (3 credits)
This course is oriented to the theory and practice of intervention in small groups. The course involves participation in a small group laboratory through which students’ experiences are integrated with conceptual frameworks, including theories of group development and leadership. Ethical issues in group processes will be considered.
AHSC 620 Learning and Individual Change Processes (3 credits)
This course will examine research and theory of individual learning and change which involves cognitive, affective and behavioural components. Intervention with an emphasis on a normative re-educative approach to facilitating learning and change will be emphasized. Illustrative intervention cases will be examined to identify essential qualities, underlying assumptions about learning and change in the context of human systems, and implications for the role of the intervener.
AHSC 631 Research Methods (3 credits)
This course examines research methods involved in action research and other applied field perspectives. Methods applicable at all stages of the research process include the literature review, defining the purpose of study, design of quantitative and qualitative research tools, data gathering, qualitative and quantitative data analysis, and reporting and communicating research results and recommendations.
Note: Students who have received credit for AHSC 630 may not take this course for credit.
AHSC 632 Planning Human Systems Intervention (3 credits)
This course examines the design and implementation of intervention programs from a systems perspective based on organizational theories, needs assessment, theories of learning and change, and group processes. It builds on basic concepts of organizational dynamics and effective human systems. Emphasis is on understanding organizational and group processes, development of planning skills, and making strategic choices. Interventions are framed in the context of collaborative action research with participant involvement at all stages including problem analysis and definition, generating and selection intervention strategies, action planning, implementation, and project evaluation.
Note: Students who have received credit for AHSC 630 may not take this course for credit.
AHSC 660 Philosophy and Ethics of Intervention (3 credits)
This course will review the philosophical underpinnings of intervention in human systems with an emphasis on a normative re-educative approach. It will address core values and ethics imbedded in change efforts, as well as examining the philosophical roots of different traditions of change methodology. It will consider the philosophical implications of change agents functioning as consultants rather than experts and as process rather than content specialists. It will consider ethical and philosophical aspects of power, strategy, and conflict, among other issues associated with intervention.
AHSC 670 Consultation Methods (3 credits)
The course will examine current models of consultation. It will enable students to establish effective client-consultant relationships based on collaborative approaches to entry, diagnosis, planning, and implementation. Ethical concerns for consultation will be integrated with discussions of methodology. Through observation and analysis of student-designed interventions, the course will provide experience-based learning and feedback. Special attention will be given to considerations of power, conflict, decision-making, negotiation, problem-solving, planning, and strategy.
AHSC 680 Facilitating Individual and Group Learning Processes (6 credits)
Prerequisite: Completion of Year I coursework (AHSC 610, 620, 631, 632, 660, 670).
This course will focus on interventions at the individual and group levels. Client-centred models of working in groups to achieve learning and task objectives will be reviewed. Issues of design, planning, and implementation of learning programs for individuals and groups, including attention to power, problem-solving, decision-making and conflict management will be examined in a laboratory setting where students will plan and conduct a group learning program under supervision.
AHSC 685 Coaching Interventions and Processes (3 credits)
This course develops professional understanding of theories and methodologies relevant to individual coaching processes in the functioning of groups, organizations and communities. Emphasis is placed on the development of competencies in executive, managerial and employee coaching. Course content encompasses phases of the coaching process, communication methodologies, obstacles and barriers to change, individual change models, strategic individual interventions, dealing with resistance, philosophy and ethics of coaching, and coaching structures. Practical components are integrated into the course.
Elective Courses
AHSC 675 Introduction to Open Systems Theory (3 credits)
This course introduces the socio-ecological version of open systems theory (OST) and practice with a particular focus on the Search Conference, the Participative Design Workshop, and Unique Designs. OST was developed to promote and create change toward a world that is consciously designed by people, and for people, living harmoniously within their ecological systems, both physical and social. Students learn how to design and implement interventions in organizations, communities and larger social systems.
Note: Students who have received credit for this course under an AHSC 681 number may not take this course for credit.
AHSC 681 Special Topics (3 credits)
Topical seminars will be offered to provide perspectives about current intervention themes. These may complement students’ programs, but will not constitute part of the required curriculum. Examples include: emerging trends in organizational development; strategic planning models; the use of self as an instrument of change; intercultural issues in intervention; appreciative inquiry; complexity theory.
AHSC 682 Special Topics (6 credits)
Same as AHSC 681 when a second special topic is offered in the same term.
AHSC 695 Independent Study I (3 credits)
Students may pursue studies in areas of specialized professional interest related to the graduate program or as a means of strengthening understanding of the core areas of the graduate program.
AHSC 696 Independent Study II (3 credits)
Students may pursue a second area of specialized professional interest related to the graduate program or further develop understanding in the core areas of the graduate program.
Project
AHSC 698 Master’s Project (15 credits)
Prerequisite: Completion of AHSC 680.
Students must demonstrate their ability to conduct a complete intervention to effect change in a human system as the principal consultant in a collaborative relationship with a client representing that system. The project includes contracting with the client, gathering and analyzing data, implementing relevant intervention activities, and evaluating the intervention as well as their role.
AHSC 510 Advanced Research Methods in Youth Work (3 credits)
This course reviews approaches to applied research that are applicable to youth work practice. Students compare a range of methodological approaches, explore definitions of evidence-based practice and learn techniques for collecting, analyzing and disseminating qualitative and quantitative data. Students undertake an applied research project, relevant to an area of practice or programs of intervention with youth. Emphasis is placed on ethical issues, developmentally appropriate research practices, and accountability.
AHSC 520 Psychoeducation and Youth Work Ethics in Practice (3 credits)
This course provides an introduction to applied ethics in youth work with a focus on the Code of Ethics of the Ordre des psychoéducateurs et psychoéducatrices du Québec. It also reviews the policy, legislative and organizational contexts of the practice of psychoeducation and youth work, and considers the ways in which models of ethical decision making inform practice. Topics include confidentiality and information sharing in inter-professional contexts, balancing issues of control, empowerment and education, developing critical reflexivity, and appreciating the complexities and dilemmas inherent in youth work practice.
AHSC 522 Fundamentals of Child and Youth Care Work (3 credits)
This course provides students with an understanding of the scope and status of child and youth care work, sensitizes them to the necessary competencies and daily challenges of this work in a range of settings, and reviews relevant theory. Intervention planning in the context of psychoeducation and relational child and youth care work is emphasized.
AHSC 525 Individual and Group Intervention with Youth (3 credits)
Prerequisite: AHSC 522 previously or concurrently.
A main focus of this course is to develop skills in relationship building and communication with youth. A micro-skills approach is introduced, as well as principles of group leadership and crisis intervention with youth. Principles of reflexive youth work, including developmentally-informed group leadership, are also covered.
AHSC 527 Advanced Youth Work Intervention: Case Management and Supervision (3 credits)
Prerequisite: AHSC 525.
This course explores the fundamental concepts and theories of case management and supervision as applied to youth work practice. Topics include supervisory relationship and process issues, self-care, ethical and professional considerations, leadership and mentoring relationships, multi-disciplinary teams and teamwork, managing change, debriefing in response to a crisis and developing, implementing and monitoring effective and collaborative case plans with young people and their families.
AHSC 530 Community Youth Development (3 credits)
Prerequisite: AHSC 525.
This course explores both historical and contemporary foundations of non-formal, community-based youth development in Canada and internationally. It focuses on creating opportunities for youth to engage with individuals, organizations and institutions at the community level. Various community youth development models are explored in-depth with practical applications for community-based youth programs, including life skills, assets, resiliency, and ecological models. Emphasis is placed on research, theory and practice applied in community youth development environments.
AHSC 540 Mental Health and Addictions: Youth Work Perspectives, Policies and Practices (3 credits)
Prerequisite: AHSC 525.
This course explores the precursors, presentations, nature and impacts of mental health concerns and addictions for youth, their families, and within communities. Students have the opportunity to develop, and apply within the classroom, knowledge and skills related to addictions and mental illness prevention, assessment and intervention, and mental health promotion. Topics include an introduction to adolescent psychopathology; diagnosis, assessment, and current policy and practices in relation to the current edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of the American Psychiatric Association (DSM); the uses of standardized testing to evaluate adaptation; psychopharmacology; suicide; evidence-based and alternative treatment interventions (e.g., psychoeducational approaches; dialectical behaviour therapy);ethical and legislative considerations; and the roles/responsibilities of youth workers in the inter-professional and community care of adolescents with mental health and/or addictions concerns.
AHSC 565 Parent-Child Relations (3 credits)
This course provides an advanced understanding of parenting theories, research, and applications in the context of parent-child relations over the life span. Topics include parenting rights and responsibilities, parenting practices and programs, high-risk parenting, issues in the transition from parenting children to parenting adolescents and parental assessment.
Elective Courses
AHSC 512 Sexuality in Human Relations (3 credits)
This course provides students with knowledge of physical and psychosocial aspects of sexuality in relationships through life and specifically during adolescence with an examination of values, attitudes, and issues related to the development and expression of sexuality. Topics include gender identity development, fuzzy identities, teen pregnancy, family, cultural and media influences; historically and culturally based attitudes; prevention and sexually transmitted diseases; self-perception and identity in sexuality; sexual diversity; and emotion and sexuality. The course aims to foster respect for persons and diversity.
AHSC 513 Family Communication (3 credits)
This course is an examination of patterns, effective approaches, and issues in communication among persons in primary partnerships and families with adolescents. It also explores topics such as diversity in forms of “family,” decision-making, problem-solving, power relations, gender issues, managing differences in expectations, and the influences of cultural, social, and economic contexts. Interventions for youth work practice designed to enhance communication and strengthen the parent-youth bond are explored.
AHSC 551 Counselling Skills and Concepts (6 credits)
This course advances students’ understanding of core counselling theories and develops an understanding for theoretical and value frameworks of the youth work therapeutic relationship. It fosters the application of essential helping skills for relational practice within youth work settings. Skill areas include attending skills, such as attending to nonverbal behaviour, reflection of content, reflection of feeling, paraphrasing and summarizing, empathy, selfdisclosure; and influencing skills, such as interpretation and analysis. Also highlighted are ethical issues, attention to cultural differences, and practitioner reflexivity.
AHSC 560 Health Promotion (6 credits)
This course helps students to develop intervention skills and theoretical understanding in the area of health promotion across the lifespan. It is of particular interest to youth work students whose career interests involve lifestyle planning, health and wellness promotion, and stress management with young people. A holistic approach including cultural and developmental understandings are discussed in relation to the following topics: health and wellness, stress and illness, psychological and physical self‑appraisal processes, psychosomatic processes and disorders, understanding addictions and their management, interventions to promote health and wellness, behavioural self‑management, and issues in medical/psychological health compliance.
AHSC 598 Special Topics in Youth Work (3 credits)
Specific topics for this course and prerequisites relevant in each case are stated in the Graduate Class Schedule.
AHSC 599 Independent Study (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the Department.
Students work on topics in consultation with a study supervisor. The study may include readings, field studies, and/or research.
Fieldwork
AHSC 533 Internship I in Youth Work (3 credits)
Prerequisites: AHSC 522, 525.
This entry-level internship in youth work is designed to provide an opportunity for a first field experience that promotes integration into a clinical or normative youth work setting. A major focus is on participatory observation. Students are required to participate in a field placement one day per week, for a total of 100 hours in settings such as schools, community organizations, hospitals, or rehabilitation centres. The site is selected in consultation with the Graduate Program Director.
AHSC 537 Internship II in Youth Work (6 credits)
Prerequisites: AHSC 533 and 12 credits completed in youth work with permission of the Department.
This 220-hour internship is designed to provide a supervised apprenticeship in either a clinical or normative youth work setting that builds on the student’s previous courses. The focus of this internship is that the student fully assumes all the duties and responsibilities of a youth worker in the same site selected for the first internship. The student’s work is supervised and evaluated by an on-site field supervisor.
OR
AHSC 538 Extended Internship in Youth Work (9 credits)
Prerequisites: AHSC 533 and 12 credits completed in youth work with permission of the Department.
This 320-hour internship is designed to provide a full-time supervised experience in either a clinical or a normative youth work setting and requires additional hours to assist the student in building his/her application for licensing. The focus of this internship is that the student fully assumes all the duties and responsibilities of a youth worker in the same site selected for the first internship. The student’s work is supervised and evaluated by an on-site field supervisor.
BIOL 850 Research proposal and qualifying exam (6 credits)
The student prepares a written research proposal based upon the research topic chosen for thesis research. The proposal is prepared in consultation with the supervisory committee and contains a literature review, a progress report and a detailed description of future experiments. The proposal should demonstrate a good understanding of the background of the project, the questions to be answered, and the experimental approaches needed to answer these questions. Both the written proposal and an oral summary of the proposal are presented to the examining committee within one year of entry into the PhD program.
BIOL 890 Research and thesis (75 credits)
BIOL 696 Master’s Research and Thesis (36 credits)
The following courses in Biochemistry may be taken for credit in the program.
CHEM 670 Selected Topics in Biochemistry and Biophysics
CHEM 671 Structure and Function of Biomembranes
CHEM 673 Neurochemistry
CHEM 677 Enzyme Kinetics and Mechanism
CHEM 678 Protein Engineering and Design
BIOL 616 Current Advances in Ecological Research
This course is given in alternate years and reviews selected areas of current research in ecology, evolution and behaviour through critical analysis of recent publications. Topics vary from year to year, and are determined in part by the interests of the students. Material covered may include papers published in refereed journals, monographs or books on specialized topics, or new textbooks covering advanced topics in a relevant area. Students are responsible for giving class presentations of selected material, leading class discussions, and submitting critiques and answers to assigned essay questions. Grading is based upon class participation, oral presentations and written work. Lectures only. (No laboratory component).
BIOL 622 Advanced Techniques in Ecology *
This course introduces students to a variety of techniques of experimental design, data collection, and quantitative analysis. Students participate in a series of modules, each of which presents experimental and analytical techniques appropriate for one area of modern research in ecology, behaviour, or evolution. Some modules require students to collect and subsequently analyze original data from field or laboratory settings. Modules and their contents may vary from year to year. Tutorials and laboratory.
BIOL 623 Advanced Applied Ecology and Conservation *
This course applies principles of ecology at the individual, population, community and ecosystem level to identify and solve practical environmental problems. Topics include pollution, climate change, and farming, harvesting renewable resources, designing nature reserves and conserving bio-diversity. Lectures and tutorials.
BIOL 624 Advances in Decomposer Communities and Nutrient Cycling *
This course examines the role of the microbial community in the fundamental processes of decomposition and nutrient cycling. We discuss the role of microbes in the breakdown of organic molecules and the release and transformation of mineral elements. Emphasis is placed on the interactions between decomposition and on the interactions between bacteria, fungi, and the microbes in the maintenance of nutrient cycles. Lectures and laboratory.
BIOL 633 Advanced Immunology *
The role of the immune system in maintenance of body homeostasis will be presented with particular reference to cells and tissues of the immune system, their organization as well as their structural and functional relationships. Topics include: maturation and differentiation of B and T lymphocytes; structure and properties of antibodies; immune responses to antigens; genetic aspects of antibody synthesis; immunological considerations in AIDS, cancer, and autoimmune diseases. Lectures and seminars.
BIOL 634 Advanced Cell Biology *
Lectures dealing with selected topics in mammalian cell biology. These include introduction to the elements of cell biology. Introduction to the elements of cell culture with reference to the growth and function of non-differentiated and differentiated cells. Control of cell cycling under normal and abnormal states, mechanisms of peptide and steroid hormone action with emphasis on intracellular signaling pathways. The control of gene transcription and detailed analysis of the effect of host cell factors on virus replication. Lectures only.
BIOL 660 Advanced Plant Biochemistry *
Biochemical study of the natural constituents and secondary metabolites unique to plants. Their biosynthesis, biotransformations, and functions in plants, as well as their economic and pharmacologic importance are stressed. Lectures only.
BIOL 661 Advanced Tissue Culture *
This course looks at plant-growth regulators, nutritional requirements, and other factors necessary for in-vitro culturing of plant cells and tissues. The course also discusses methods available for nuclear transfers and the propagation of transformed plants. Lectures only.
BIOL 670 Scientific Communication
This course is offered every other year and is open to all graduate students in Biology or by special permission from the instructor. It is designed to present the requirements for publishable scientific writing, successful research proposals and the presentation of oral papers at scientific meetings. The course emphasizes good writing habits, focuses on the importance of thought, the conciseness of statements and clarity of exposition. The course combines lectures, group discussions, workshops and oral presentations. Marks are based on a number of written assignments, oral presentations as well as participation in class.
BIOL 671 Scanning Electron Microscopy *
This course is given alternate years in the Summer session and explains both the theory and practice of instrumentation and methodology. Students learn to operate the Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) and ancillary equipment such as sputter-coater and the critical point drier. Hands-on learning experience is stressed to acquire familiarity with special techniques. Instructions cover three aspects: instrumentation, specimen preparation (fixation and drying), and specimen mounting and coating. Tutorials and laboratory.
BIOL 687 Advanced Molecular Genetics *
This course concentrates on basic microbial and molecular genetics, introducing isolation and characterization of mutants, methods of mapping mutants, transposons, episomes, and recombinant DNA techniques. Lectures and conferences.
BIOL 688 Advances in Biological Regulatory Mechanisms *
This course examines the molecular basis of the control of metabolic pathways with an emphasis on procaryote systems. The course concentrates on the analysis of the rationale of experimentation used to elucidate these regulatory mechanisms. Lectures and conferences.
BIOL 689 Advanced Techniques in Molecular Biology *
Theory and practice of modern experimental procedures of molecular biology, including use of restriction enzymes, gene cloning, and hybridizations, DNA sequencing, site-directed mutagenesis, and the use of bacteria and phage in biotechnology. Laboratory and tutorials.
BIO 690 Advanced Gene Structure *
This course deals with gene regulation in eukaryotes. Topics covered include transcription, transcript processing, translation, and post-translational processes. Lectures only.
* Course descriptions listed here correspond to undergraduate course descriptions except for BIOL 616 and 670 which are not available to undergraduate students. It is understood that an instructor who grants written permission to register in the course as a graduate student will require extra work from the students for graduate credit. These courses are open to doctoral students only under exceptional circumstances.
BIOL 516 Project in Biotechnology and Genomics (6 credits)
PHIL 530 Ethical, Legal and Social Implications of Biotechnology
Elective Courses (9 credits)
BIOL 521 Industrial and Environmental Biotechnology
BIOL 523 Agriculture and Agri-Food Biotechnology
BIOL 524 High-throughput Instrumentation
BIOL 525 Biological Computing and Synthetic Biology
CHEM 678 Protein Engineering and Design
Academic Regulations
Academic Standing. Please refer to the Academic Standing section of the Calendar for a detailed review of the Academic Regulations.
Time Limit. Please refer to the Academic Regulation page for further details regarding the Time Limit requirements.
Graduation Requirement. To graduate, students must have completed all course requirements with a cumulative grade point average of at least 3.00.
Courses
BIOL 510 Bioinformatics
Prerequisites: BIOL 367 or equivalent; COMP 228 (System Hardware) or permission of the Diploma Program Director.
This course provides the tools for life scientists to interpret and analyze biological sequence data. It provides a general overview of the growth in availability of genetic information. The course covers the genetic databases; the rapidly-increasing number of genome databases, including the human genome database; the sequence homology search engines and search algorithms; software for the identification of structural sequence components; and the determination of evolutionary relationships between sequences.
BIOL 511 Structural Genomics
This course provides an overview of genome analysis including: cloning systems; sequencing strategies; methods of detecting genes and approaches to mapping genomes. It covers the theory and design of the different approaches, and the analysis of genomic data generated from them.
BIOL 512 Functional Genomics
This course focuses on the functional analysis of expressed genes and their products. Course content includes the construction and screening of normalized cDNA libraries, analysis of expressed sequence tags (ESTs), functional analysis by gene knock-outs, localization of gene products by gene knowk-ins, transcription profiling, systematic identification of proteins, and functional analysis of proteins by detection of protein-protein interactions.
BIOL 515 Biotechnology and Genomics Laboratory
This is a hands-on course on techniques used in biotechnology and genomics. Experiments conducted in this course include separation and mapping of high molecular weight DNA fragments, shotgun sequencing, ESTs sequencing, protein production in bacteria and fungi, functional analysis of protein products, protein arrays, and in vivo detection of protein interactions. This course incurs an additional fee to cover laboratory supplies and equipment.
BIOL 516 Project in Biotechnology and Genomics (6 credits)
Prerequisites: BIOL 466; BIOL 368; or permission of the Diploma Program Director.
Each student conducts a project under the supervision of a faculty member at Concordia or other research institutions affiliated with the program. The project topic requires approval by the course coordinator. The project can be taken over an 8-month (10 hours per week) of a 4-month period (20 hours per week) at Concordia or other approved institutions or companies. The project will be chosen from one or more of the following fields: biotechnology, genomics, bioinformatics, and high-throughput experimentation. The nature of the project can be research, development, or application. A student who is working full-time or part-time can pursue the project in his/her place of employment subject to approval. (Approval will only be given to projects which are clearly demonstrated to be independent of the regular work requirement). At the end of the project, the student is required to submit a report on the results of the project and present the results publicly in the form of a scientific poster or a short talk at a scheduled Genomics/Biotechnology Research Day.
BIOL 521 Industrial and Environmental Biotechnology
Prerequisites: BIOL 511; BIOL 512.
This course provides an in-depth evaluation of current biotechnology tools used in pharmaceutical and forestry industries, and in environmental remediation. New technologies and genomic approaches that can be applied to these processes are also discussed.
BIOL 523 Agriculture and Agri-Food Biotechnology
Prerequisites: BIOL 511; BIOL 512.
This course provides an overview on the use of biotechnology in agriculture and in the agri-food industry. Plant genomics and genetic manipulation of plants are emphasized. Also discussed are biotechnology methods used in reducing agricultural pollutants and converting agricultural surplus to energy.
BIOL 524 High-throughput Instrumentation
Prerequisites: BIOL 511; BIOL 512.
This is a hands-on introduction to high-throughput instruments used in biotechnology and genomics. Students are exposed to capillary electrophoresis-based DNA sequencing, microplate-based PCR reactions and purification of PCR products, construction of DNA chips, microarray scanning, and liquid handling robotics. Enrolment in this course is restricted to ten students.
BIOL 525    Biological Computing and Synthetic Biology
This is an interdisciplinary course offered to students who are either in Biology or Electrical and Computer Engineering programs. Students are introduced to the emerging field of synthetic biology and learn to design computational machines that can be implemented in biological media. The term is divided into two phases. In Phase I, Biology students learn basic computer hardware and software concepts, while Engineering students are introduced to gene structure and recombinant DNA technology. In Phase II, all students learn the principles and various applications of cell-based computational machines. Students work in teams to create a project proposal to describe the design of a computational machine using gene regulatory networks. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for COEN 6211 or for this topic under a BIOL 631 or COEN 691 number may not take this course for credit.
PHIL 530 Ethical, Legal, and Social Implications of Biotechnology
Prerequisite: BIOL 367 or permission of the Diploma Program Director.
This interdisciplinary course examines some of the ethical, legal, and social implications of recent developments in biotechnology, genomics, and bioinformatics. Students explore current debates about biotechnologies in the fields of agricultural biotechnology, global development, and environmental risk. Issues such as commercialization and intellectual property, the role of media and public perceptions of biotechnologies, and social responsibility and policy formation are also addressed.
CHEM 896: Research Proposal and Comprehensive Examination (9 credits).
A student in the doctoral program is required to present a progress report on his/her research and on future research plans. The presentation should reflect the student's awareness of current research in his/her field and demonstrate an ability to carry out a significant research problem and provide a rational approach to its solution. The student's knowledge and understanding of fundamental chemical and biochemical principles will also be examined.
The student is expected to complete CHEM 896 within 18 months of admission directly into the PhD program, or within 28 months of admission via the MSc stream. In exceptional circumstances the department may permit an extension of time for completion of this course. The CHEM 896 Examining Committee assigns one of the following two grades: (a) PASS - the student is admitted to candidacy for a PhD degree in Chemistry; (b) FAIL - the student must withdraw from the program.
CHEM 856: Doctoral Research and Thesis (72 credits).
CHEM 668: PhD Research Seminar (3 credits).
The course is designed to give students practice at communicating and defending their thesis research topic in a professional forum, and should successfully inform an audience of chemists and biochemists.
With permission from their supervisory committee students are allowed to substitute graduate level courses from other departments relevant to their research problems, or professional development (e.g., selected MBA courses) as partial fulfillment towards their degree requirements.
Thesis. Students will work on a research topic under the direction of a faculty member and present an acceptable thesis at the conclusion (CHEM 856 - Doctoral Research and Thesis). Students may submit a manuscript-based thesis following the guidelines outlined in the section on Thesis Regulations in this calendar. In addition, a public oral examination will be conducted to test the student's ability to defend the thesis.
Seminars. Each student is required to attend and participate in departmental seminars.
Cross-Registration. Students may, with the permission of their supervisory committee, cross-register for courses falling in the Topics categories in other Quebec institutions.
Academic Regulations
Academic Standing. Please refer to the Academic Standing section of the Calendar for a detailed review of the Academic Regulations.
Program Specific Requirements. Students must obtain an assessment grade point average (AGPA) of 3.00 based on a minimum of 6 credits.
Residence. The minimum period of residence is two years (6 terms) of full-time graduate study beyond the master’s degree or three years (9 terms) of full-time graduate study (or the equivalent in part-time study) beyond the bachelor’s degree for those students who are permitted to enrol for doctoral studies without completing a master’s degree. It should be understood that this is a minimum requirement, and that a longer period may be necessary in order to complete all of the work that is required for the degree.
Time Limit. Please refer to the Academic Regulation page for further details regarding the Time Limit requirements.
Graduation Requirement. In order to graduate, students must have a cumulative GPA of at least 3.00.
Courses
Specific course offerings in subject areas listed under Topics will generally vary from year to year, depending on the availability of faculty and the requirements of graduate students in the program. In the MSc program, every student must complete CHEM 666 (Seminar); in the PhD program CHEM 668 (Seminar) and CHEM 896 (Research Proposal and Comprehensive Examination) must be completed by every student.
Courses are worth 3 credits unless otherwise indicated. Over the next few years the department will offer a selection of courses from those listed below. Additional Selected Topics courses may be offered in a given year, and these will be identified by different subtitles. Further information on Selected Topics courses will be available from the department at the beginning of each academic year.
Topics in Analytical & Bioanalytical Chemistry
CHEM 610 Selected Topics in Analytical Chemistry
This course explores themes within the area of Analytical Chemistry.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. CHEM 610A, CHEM 610B, etc.
CHEM 612 Analytical Separations
Prerequisite: CHEM 218, 312, or equivalent.
High performance liquid separations on an analytical (non-preparative) scale are surveyed. Fundamental separation mechanisms and application of the techniques are discussed. Emphasis is placed on separations of biologically relevant analytes which include peptides, proteins and nucleic acids. Lectures only.
CHEM 614 Modern Aspects of Practical Mass Spectrometry
Prerequisite: CHEM 494 or equivalent, previously or concurrently.
Theoretical and operational aspects of modern mass spectrometry are discussed in a number of formal lectures and training sessions. All students must carry out an independent mass spectrometry project on their molecules of choice. Projects can be selected from all areas of chemistry, biochemistry or biology including the “omics” sciences (e.g., proteomics, metabolomics).
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a CHEM 630 number may not take this course for credit.
Topics in Bioorganic & Organic Chemistry
CHEM 620 Selected Topics in Organic Chemistry
This course explores themes within the area of Organic Chemistry.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. CHEM 620A, CHEM 620B, etc.
CHEM 621 Physical Organic Chemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 222, 235; CHEM 324 or 325; or equivalent.
Determination of organic reaction mechanisms using kinetics, activation parameters, acid-base catalysis, Bronsted catalysis law, solvent effects, medium effects, isotope effects, substitutent effects, and linear free energy relationships. Lectures only.
CHEM 623 Organic Synthesis
Prerequisite: CHEM 222, 235, 324, or equivalent.
This course is concerned with synthetic strategy and design. It provides an introduction to advanced synthetic methods and reagents, involving heteroatoms such as sulphur, phosphorus, tin and selenium, as well as an overview of the uses of protecting groups in organic chemistry. The concept of retrosynthesis and a few asymmetric reactions are discussed using syntheses of natural products from the literature as examples. Lectures only.
CHEM 625 Nucleic Acid Chemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 221, 222, 271, or equivalent.
This course introduces students to various topics in nucleic acid chemistry. The topics include nomenclature, structure and function of RNA and DNA; techniques and methods to investigate nucleic acid structure; DNA damage and repair; interaction of small molecules and proteins with nucleic acid; oligonucleotide-based therapeutics (antisense, antigene, RNAi); synthesis of purines, pyrimidines and nucleosides; and solid-phase oligonucleotide synthesis. Lectures only.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a CHEM 620 number may not take this course for credit.
CHEM 626 Reactive Intermediates
Prerequisite: CHEM 324, 325, or equivalent.
This course offers an introduction to reactive intermediates with an emphasis on structure and stability as found in modern (physical) organic chemistry. While the focus is on radicals and carbenes, carbocations are discussed near the end of the term. The material covered is relevant to chemistry and biochemistry. Lectures only.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a CHEM 621 number may not take this course for credit.
CHEM 627 Supramolecular Chemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 324 or 325; CHEM 335; or equivalent; or permission of the Department.
This course reviews some fundamental aspects of synthetic and biological supramolecular chemistry and nanotechnology. Topics covered may include supramolecular forces, ion binding and ion channels, molecular recognition, self-assembly (meso-scale and molecular-scale), organometallic supramolecular chemistry, dynamic combinatorial chemistry (DCC), and foldamers. Lectures only.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a CHEM 620 number may not take this course for credit.
Topics in Physical Chemistry
CHEM 630 Selected Topics in Physical Chemistry
This course explores themes within the area of Physical Chemistry.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. CHEM 630A, CHEM 630B, etc.
CHEM 631 Computational Chemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 234, 241, 333, or equivalent; or permission of the Department.
This course presents the concepts, tools, and techniques of modern computational chemistry, and provides a very broad overview of the various fields of application across chemistry and biochemistry. The course is divided into two parts: 1) Molecular structure, which covers molecular mechanics and elementary electronic structure theory of atoms and molecules; and 2) Chemical reactivity, which covers applications of quantum chemistry and molecular dynamics techniques to studies of chemical reactions. The applications discussed include organic molecules and their reactions, peptides and proteins, drug design, DNA, polymers, inorganics, and materials. The course includes a practical component where students acquire hands-on experience with commonly used computational chemistry computer software. Lectures and laboratory.
CHEM 632 Non-equilibrium Thermodynamics
Prerequisite: CHEM 234 or equivalent.
In this course, the basic concepts of classical (equilibrium) thermodynamics are first reviewed, followed by an introduction to statistical thermodynamics which gives a unified method of treating transport processes. At this point, the Boltzmann distribution function is derived, which leads to the statistical interpretation of entropy. Other important thermodynamic functions such as the partition function, the partition function for large ensembles and the Sackur-Tetrode equation are examined. The course also addresses non-equilibrium thermodynamics in the linear domain. The relations describing the production of entropy in irreversible processes due to heat transfer, charge transfer, change of volume, and chemical reactions are examined. The establishment of flux equations and the use of the Onsager reciprocal relations are then applied to the description of a variety of open systems. Lectures only.
CHEM 633 Quantum Mechanics in Chemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 333, 431/631, or equivalent.
This course includes a thorough review of basic quantum mechanics in both the Schroedinger and Heisenberg representations, electronic structure theory, symmetry and group theory, interaction of matter with light, quantum scattering, the path integral formalism, quantum theories of chemical reaction rates, time-dependent approaches to spectroscopy, wave packet propagation, correlation functions and dynamics processes, and density matrices. Lectures only.
CHEM 635 Interfacial Phenomena
Prerequisite: CHEM 234, 235, or equivalent.
This course examines the physical chemistry of interfaces including surface and interfacial tensions, the absorption of surface active substances/surface excess properties, and surfactant self-assembly. Topics covered may include Gibbs and Langmuir monolayers, micelle formation, emulsions, foams, surfactant liquid crystals, layer-by-layer polymer self-assembly, and biological membranes. Techniques for characterization and applications (biological and industrial) of these systems are addressed. Lectures only.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a CHEM 630 number may not take this course for credit.
CHEM 638 Physics and Chemistry of Solid State Electronic Materials
Prerequisite: CHEM 234, 333, or equivalent.
This course essentially explores how electrical conductivity is influenced by the nature of the chemical bonding in these solid-state materials. The course provides an introduction to solid-state structures and then goes on to explore band theory, the central model used to describe electrical conductivity in the following three categories of electronic materials: conductors, semiconductors, and insulators. Finally the course explores the extension of the band model to interpret electrical conductivity in molecular semiconductors and charge-transfer complexes. Lectures only.
Topics in Bioinorganic & Inorganic Chemistry
CHEM 640 Selected Topics in Inorganic Chemistry
This course explores themes within the area of Inorganic Chemistry.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. CHEM 640A, CHEM 640B, etc.
CHEM 643 Organometallic Chemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 324, 341, or equivalent.
This course covers the structure and properties of organometallic compounds, their main reactions and their application in catalysis and organic chemistry. Lectures only.
CHEM 644 Physical Methods in Chemistry
This course provides an in-depth evaluation of the different methods used in modern physical chemistry such as laser, microwave, FT-IR, electron spin resonance, nuclear magnetic resonance, x-ray photoelectron, x-ray diffraction and fluorescence, Auger eletron, Mössbauer, and gamma-ray spectroscopic analysis, as well as scanning probe microscopy and mass spectrometry. Lectures only.
CHEM 645 Bioinorganic Chemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 241, 271, or equivalent.
Role of metals in biochemical systems. Essential trace elements, zinc enzymes, oxygen transport and storage, metalloproteins and biological electron transfer, structure-function relationships in heme enzymes, nitrogen fixation; model compounds for metalloproteins and metalloenzymes. Lectures only.
CHEM 646 Industrial Catalysis
Prerequisite: CHEM 234, 235, or equivalent.
Basic and recent concepts in catalysis are described with particular emphasis on heterogenous catalysis. The technical, economic and environmental aspects of industrial catalysis are covered. The processes to be studied are chosen from the petroleum industry, the natural gas and coal processing industry, and the production of thermoplastics and synthetic fibres. The course ends with a rapid survey of problems associated with the treatment of industrial pollutants and with catalytic converters. Lectures only.
Topics in Multidisciplinary Chemistry
CHEM 650 Selected Topics in Multidisciplinary Chemistry
This course explores themes within the area of Multidisciplinary Chemistry.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. CHEM 650A, CHEM 650B, etc.
CHEM 651 Nanochemistry
Prerequisites: CHEM 217, 218, 221, 222, 234, 235, 241, or equivalent.
This modular course covers the areas of production, characterization and applications of nanoscale structures and materials. Each module is taught by a different professor as well as guest lecturers. Topics may include (but are not limited to): size dependent properties, synthesis of organic and inorganic nanostructures, self-assembled structures, chemical patterning and functional nanopatterns, biomaterials. Nanometer scale fabrication techniques such as lithographic methods, nano-stamping and patterned self-assembly are discussed. Modern analysis techniques such as atomic force microscopy and electron microscopy, which are used to map and measure at the single molecule level are introduced. Applications such as photonics, optical properties, biodetection and biosensors, micro- and nano-fluidics, nanoelectronics and nanomachines are presented. The course includes a term project carried out using the nanoscience facilities held in the department research labs.
CHEM 658 Aquatic Biogeochemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 217, 218, 312, or equivalent.
The major aim of this course is to present a quantitative treatment of the variables that determine the composition of natural waters. Chemical equilibrium is the central theme of the course, but consideration is also given to kinetics, steady-state and dynamic models. Related themes include global chemical cycles, air and water pollution, as well as current research topics in water chemistry and chemical oceanography. Lectures only.
Note: Students who have received credit for CHEM 618 or for this topic under a CHEM 610 number may not take this course for credit.
Topics in Biochemistry
CHEM 670 Selected Topics in Biochemistry and Biophysics
This course explores themes within the area of Biochemistry and Biophysics.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. CHEM 670A, CHEM 670B, etc.
CHEM 676 Structure and Function of Biomembranes
Prerequisite: BIOL 266, CHEM 375, or equivalent.
Examples from the current literature are used to discuss what is known about how the membranes of biological organisms are assembled and the roles that these membranes play in a number of important processes. Emphasis is placed on the transport of proteins to and through biomembranes and the roles that membranes play in metabolite and ion transport. Where applicable, the significance of these processes is illustrated by examining the roles of membranes in health and disease. Lectures only.
Note: Students who have received credit for CHEM 671 may not take this course for credit.
CHEM 677 Enzyme Kinetics and Mechanism
Prerequisite: CHEM 271, 375, or equivalent.
This course explores steady-state kinetics, including such topics as the use of initial velocity studies and product inhibition to establish a kinetic mechanism; nonsteady-state kinetics, isotope effects, energy of activation, and the detailed mechanisms of selected enzymes. Lectures only.
CHEM 678 Protein Engineering and Design
Prerequisite: CHEM 271, 375, or equivalent.
This course examines the principles behind protein design, how techniques of protein engineering are used, and the methods used to assess protein properties. Examples include studies of protein stability, structure-function relationships, and applications to drug design. Lectures only.
Topics in Instrumentation
CHEM 690 Selected Topics in Instrumentation
This course explores themes within the area of Instrumentation.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. CHEM 690A, CHEM 690B, etc.
CHEM 691 Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy
Prerequisite: CHEM 222, 393, or equivalent.
This course is designed to provide the background in magnetic resonance theory necessary to understand modern high-resolution NMR experiments and instrumentation. The basic theory in the introductory section also applies to electron spin resonance (ESR). Relaxation and through-bond and through-space interactions, and experiments to investigate them are considered. Spin manipulations and behaviour in multiple-pulse, Fourier transform NMR techniques used for common spectral editing and two-dimensional experiments are discussed. Lectures only.
CHEM 692 Experimental Protein Chemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 477 or equivalent or permission of the Department.
This “hands on” course introduces students to the common techniques used to study the structure and function of proteins and other macromolecules. Techniques covered include circular dichroism spectroscopy, fluorescence, UV/Vis spectroscopy, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, isothermal titration microcalorimetry, analytical ultracentrifugation, and protein crystallization/X-ray crystallography. The course includes theory, applications of the technique to the study of protein structure and function, and basic practice experiments to become familiar with the instrument and data analysis. For some of the techniques covered hands-on use will be limited. Each student is required to carry out a project on his/her own protein of interest. Each participant asks a specific question about a protein and then uses the techniques covered in the course to address the question. Lectures and laboratory.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a CHEM 690 number may not take this course for credit.
Theses, Seminars, Comprehensive Exam and Special Courses
CHEM 667 PhD Literature/Topic Seminar
CHEM 668 PhD Research Seminar
CHEM 856 Doctoral Research and Thesis (72 credits)
CHEM 896 Research Proposal and Comprehensive Examination (9 credits)
CHEM 655 - Master's Research and Thesis (33 credits);
CHEM 666 - MSc Seminar (3 credits).
This course provides an opportunity for the student to prepare and present materials concerning their current research problem in an area of chemistry or biochemistry to a critical audience. It is designed to give students practice at communicating and defending their ideas on a research topic in a professional forum, and should successfully inform a broad audience of chemists and biochemists.
With permission from their supervisory committee, students are allowed to take graduate level courses from other departments relevant to their research problems, as partial fulfillment towards their degree requirements.
Thesis. Students will work on a research topic under the direction of a faculty member and present an acceptable thesis at the conclusion. CHEM 655 - Master's Research and Thesis will be examined by the student's supervisory committee before being accepted by the department. Students may submit a manuscript-based thesis following the guidelines outlined in the section on Thesis Regulations in this calendar. In addition, an oral examination will be conducted before a committee of the department to test the student’s ability to defend the thesis.
Seminars. Each student is required to attend and participate in departmental seminars.
Research Areas. Areas for possible research are listed before the Doctor of/Doctorate in Philosophy section.
Cross-Registration. Students may, with the permission of their supervisory committee, cross-register for courses falling in the Topics categories in other Quebec institutions.
Academic Regulations
Academic Standing. Please refer to the Academic Standing section of the Calendar for a detailed review of the Academic Regulations.
Program Specific Requirements. Students must obtain an assessment grade point average (AGPA) of 2.70 based on a minimum of 6 credits.
Residence. The minimum residence requirement is one year (3 terms) of full-time study, or the equivalent in part-time study. The degree can normally be completed in two years (6 terms) of full-time study.
Time Limit. Please refer to the Academic Regulation page for further details regarding the Time Limit requirements.
Graduation Requirement. In order to graduate, students must have a cumulative GPA of at least 2.70.
Courses
Specific course offerings in subject areas listed under Topics will generally vary from year to year, depending on the availability of faculty and the requirements of graduate students in the program. In the MSc program, every student must complete CHEM 666 (Seminar); in the PhD program CHEM 668 (Seminar) and CHEM 896 (Research Proposal and Comprehensive Examination) must be completed by every student.
Courses are worth 3 credits unless otherwise indicated. Over the next few years the department will offer a selection of courses from those listed below. Additional Selected Topics courses may be offered in a given year, and these will be identified by different subtitles. Further information on Selected Topics courses will be available from the department at the beginning of each academic year.
Topics in Analytical & Bioanalytical Chemistry
CHEM 610 Selected Topics in Analytical Chemistry
This course explores themes within the area of Analytical Chemistry.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. CHEM 610A, CHEM 610B, etc.
CHEM 612 Analytical Separations
Prerequisite: CHEM 218, 312, or equivalent.
High performance liquid separations on an analytical (non-preparative) scale are surveyed. Fundamental separation mechanisms and application of the techniques are discussed. Emphasis is placed on separations of biologically relevant analytes which include peptides, proteins and nucleic acids. Lectures only.
CHEM 614 Modern Aspects of Practical Mass Spectrometry
Prerequisite: CHEM 494 or equivalent, previously or concurrently.
Theoretical and operational aspects of modern mass spectrometry are discussed in a number of formal lectures and training sessions. All students must carry out an independent mass spectrometry project on their molecules of choice. Projects can be selected from all areas of chemistry, biochemistry or biology including the “omics” sciences (e.g., proteomics, metabolomics).
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a CHEM 630 number may not take this course for credit.
Topics in Bioorganic & Organic Chemistry
CHEM 620 Selected Topics in Organic Chemistry
This course explores themes within the area of Organic Chemistry.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. CHEM 620A, CHEM 620B, etc.
CHEM 621 Physical Organic Chemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 222, 235; CHEM 324 or 325; or equivalent.
Determination of organic reaction mechanisms using kinetics, activation parameters, acid-base catalysis, Bronsted catalysis law, solvent effects, medium effects, isotope effects, substitutent effects, and linear free energy relationships. Lectures only.
CHEM 623 Organic Synthesis
Prerequisite: CHEM 222, 235, 324, or equivalent.
This course is concerned with synthetic strategy and design. It provides an introduction to advanced synthetic methods and reagents, involving heteroatoms such as sulphur, phosphorus, tin and selenium, as well as an overview of the uses of protecting groups in organic chemistry. The concept of retrosynthesis and a few asymmetric reactions are discussed using syntheses of natural products from the literature as examples. Lectures only.
CHEM 625 Nucleic Acid Chemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 221, 222, 271, or equivalent.
This course introduces students to various topics in nucleic acid chemistry. The topics include nomenclature, structure and function of RNA and DNA; techniques and methods to investigate nucleic acid structure; DNA damage and repair; interaction of small molecules and proteins with nucleic acid; oligonucleotide-based therapeutics (antisense, antigene, RNAi); synthesis of purines, pyrimidines and nucleosides; and solid-phase oligonucleotide synthesis. Lectures only.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a CHEM 620 number may not take this course for credit.
CHEM 626 Reactive Intermediates
Prerequisite: CHEM 324, 325, or equivalent.
This course offers an introduction to reactive intermediates with an emphasis on structure and stability as found in modern (physical) organic chemistry. While the focus is on radicals and carbenes, carbocations are discussed near the end of the term. The material covered is relevant to chemistry and biochemistry. Lectures only.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a CHEM 621 number may not take this course for credit.
CHEM 627 Supramolecular Chemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 324 or 325; CHEM 335; or equivalent; or permission of the Department.
This course reviews some fundamental aspects of synthetic and biological supramolecular chemistry and nanotechnology. Topics covered may include supramolecular forces, ion binding and ion channels, molecular recognition, self-assembly (meso-scale and molecular-scale), organometallic supramolecular chemistry, dynamic combinatorial chemistry (DCC), and foldamers. Lectures only.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a CHEM 620 number may not take this course for credit.
Topics in Physical Chemistry
CHEM 630 Selected Topics in Physical Chemistry
This course explores themes within the area of Physical Chemistry.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. CHEM 630A, CHEM 630B, etc.
CHEM 631 Computational Chemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 234, 241, 333, or equivalent; or permission of the Department.
This course presents the concepts, tools, and techniques of modern computational chemistry, and provides a very broad overview of the various fields of application across chemistry and biochemistry. The course is divided into two parts: 1) Molecular structure, which covers molecular mechanics and elementary electronic structure theory of atoms and molecules; and 2) Chemical reactivity, which covers applications of quantum chemistry and molecular dynamics techniques to studies of chemical reactions. The applications discussed include organic molecules and their reactions, peptides and proteins, drug design, DNA, polymers, inorganics, and materials. The course includes a practical component where students acquire hands-on experience with commonly used computational chemistry computer software. Lectures and laboratory.
CHEM 632 Non-equilibrium Thermodynamics
Prerequisite: CHEM 234 or equivalent.
In this course, the basic concepts of classical (equilibrium) thermodynamics are first reviewed, followed by an introduction to statistical thermodynamics which gives a unified method of treating transport processes. At this point, the Boltzmann distribution function is derived, which leads to the statistical interpretation of entropy. Other important thermodynamic functions such as the partition function, the partition function for large ensembles and the Sackur-Tetrode equation are examined. The course also addresses non-equilibrium thermodynamics in the linear domain. The relations describing the production of entropy in irreversible processes due to heat transfer, charge transfer, change of volume, and chemical reactions are examined. The establishment of flux equations and the use of the Onsager reciprocal relations are then applied to the description of a variety of open systems. Lectures only.
CHEM 633 Quantum Mechanics in Chemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 333, 431/631, or equivalent.
This course includes a thorough review of basic quantum mechanics in both the Schroedinger and Heisenberg representations, electronic structure theory, symmetry and group theory, interaction of matter with light, quantum scattering, the path integral formalism, quantum theories of chemical reaction rates, time-dependent approaches to spectroscopy, wave packet propagation, correlation functions and dynamics processes, and density matrices. Lectures only.
CHEM 635 Interfacial Phenomena
Prerequisite: CHEM 234, 235, or equivalent.
This course examines the physical chemistry of interfaces including surface and interfacial tensions, the absorption of surface active substances/surface excess properties, and surfactant self-assembly. Topics covered may include Gibbs and Langmuir monolayers, micelle formation, emulsions, foams, surfactant liquid crystals, layer-by-layer polymer self-assembly, and biological membranes. Techniques for characterization and applications (biological and industrial) of these systems are addressed. Lectures only.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a CHEM 630 number may not take this course for credit.
CHEM 638 Physics and Chemistry of Solid State Electronic Materials
Prerequisite: CHEM 234, 333, or equivalent.
This course essentially explores how electrical conductivity is influenced by the nature of the chemical bonding in these solid-state materials. The course provides an introduction to solid-state structures and then goes on to explore band theory, the central model used to describe electrical conductivity in the following three categories of electronic materials: conductors, semiconductors, and insulators. Finally the course explores the extension of the band model to interpret electrical conductivity in molecular semiconductors and charge-transfer complexes. Lectures only.
Topics in Bioinorganic & Inorganic Chemistry
CHEM 640 Selected Topics in Inorganic Chemistry
This course explores themes within the area of Inorganic Chemistry.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. CHEM 640A, CHEM 640B, etc.
CHEM 643 Organometallic Chemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 324, 341, or equivalent.
This course covers the structure and properties of organometallic compounds, their main reactions and their application in catalysis and organic chemistry. Lectures only.
CHEM 644 Physical Methods in Chemistry
This course provides an in-depth evaluation of the different methods used in modern physical chemistry such as laser, microwave, FT-IR, electron spin resonance, nuclear magnetic resonance, x-ray photoelectron, x-ray diffraction and fluorescence, Auger eletron, Mössbauer, and gamma-ray spectroscopic analysis, as well as scanning probe microscopy and mass spectrometry. Lectures only.
CHEM 645 Bioinorganic Chemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 241, 271, or equivalent.
Role of metals in biochemical systems. Essential trace elements, zinc enzymes, oxygen transport and storage, metalloproteins and biological electron transfer, structure-function relationships in heme enzymes, nitrogen fixation; model compounds for metalloproteins and metalloenzymes. Lectures only.
CHEM 646 Industrial Catalysis
Prerequisite: CHEM 234, 235, or equivalent.
Basic and recent concepts in catalysis are described with particular emphasis on heterogenous catalysis. The technical, economic and environmental aspects of industrial catalysis are covered. The processes to be studied are chosen from the petroleum industry, the natural gas and coal processing industry, and the production of thermoplastics and synthetic fibres. The course ends with a rapid survey of problems associated with the treatment of industrial pollutants and with catalytic converters. Lectures only.
Topics in Multidisciplinary Chemistry
CHEM 650 Selected Topics in Multidisciplinary Chemistry
This course explores themes within the area of Multidisciplinary Chemistry.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. CHEM 650A, CHEM 650B, etc.
CHEM 651 Nanochemistry
Prerequisites: CHEM 217, 218, 221, 222, 234, 235, 241, or equivalent.
This modular course covers the areas of production, characterization and applications of nanoscale structures and materials. Each module is taught by a different professor as well as guest lecturers. Topics may include (but are not limited to): size dependent properties, synthesis of organic and inorganic nanostructures, self-assembled structures, chemical patterning and functional nanopatterns, biomaterials. Nanometer scale fabrication techniques such as lithographic methods, nano-stamping and patterned self-assembly are discussed. Modern analysis techniques such as atomic force microscopy and electron microscopy, which are used to map and measure at the single molecule level are introduced. Applications such as photonics, optical properties, biodetection and biosensors, micro- and nano-fluidics, nanoelectronics and nanomachines are presented. The course includes a term project carried out using the nanoscience facilities held in the department research labs.
CHEM 658 Aquatic Biogeochemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 217, 218, 312, or equivalent.
The major aim of this course is to present a quantitative treatment of the variables that determine the composition of natural waters. Chemical equilibrium is the central theme of the course, but consideration is also given to kinetics, steady-state and dynamic models. Related themes include global chemical cycles, air and water pollution, as well as current research topics in water chemistry and chemical oceanography. Lectures only.
Note: Students who have received credit for CHEM 618 or for this topic under a CHEM 610 number may not take this course for credit.
Topics in Biochemistry
CHEM 670 Selected Topics in Biochemistry and Biophysics
This course explores themes within the area of Biochemistry and Biophysics.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. CHEM 670A, CHEM 670B, etc.
CHEM 676 Structure and Function of Biomembranes
Prerequisite: BIOL 266, CHEM 375, or equivalent.
Examples from the current literature are used to discuss what is known about how the membranes of biological organisms are assembled and the roles that these membranes play in a number of important processes. Emphasis is placed on the transport of proteins to and through biomembranes and the roles that membranes play in metabolite and ion transport. Where applicable, the significance of these processes is illustrated by examining the roles of membranes in health and disease. Lectures only.
Note: Students who have received credit for CHEM 671 may not take this course for credit.
CHEM 677 Enzyme Kinetics and Mechanism
Prerequisite: CHEM 271, 375, or equivalent.
This course explores steady-state kinetics, including such topics as the use of initial velocity studies and product inhibition to establish a kinetic mechanism; nonsteady-state kinetics, isotope effects, energy of activation, and the detailed mechanisms of selected enzymes. Lectures only.
CHEM 678 Protein Engineering and Design
Prerequisite: CHEM 271, 375, or equivalent.
This course examines the principles behind protein design, how techniques of protein engineering are used, and the methods used to assess protein properties. Examples include studies of protein stability, structure-function relationships, and applications to drug design. Lectures only.
Topics in Instrumentation
CHEM 690 Selected Topics in Instrumentation
This course explores themes within the area of Instrumentation.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. CHEM 690A, CHEM 690B, etc.
CHEM 691 Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy
Prerequisite: CHEM 222, 393, or equivalent.
This course is designed to provide the background in magnetic resonance theory necessary to understand modern high-resolution NMR experiments and instrumentation. The basic theory in the introductory section also applies to electron spin resonance (ESR). Relaxation and through-bond and through-space interactions, and experiments to investigate them are considered. Spin manipulations and behaviour in multiple-pulse, Fourier transform NMR techniques used for common spectral editing and two-dimensional experiments are discussed. Lectures only.
CHEM 692 Experimental Protein Chemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 477 or equivalent or permission of the Department.
This “hands on” course introduces students to the common techniques used to study the structure and function of proteins and other macromolecules. Techniques covered include circular dichroism spectroscopy, fluorescence, UV/Vis spectroscopy, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, isothermal titration microcalorimetry, analytical ultracentrifugation, and protein crystallization/X-ray crystallography. The course includes theory, applications of the technique to the study of protein structure and function, and basic practice experiments to become familiar with the instrument and data analysis. For some of the techniques covered hands-on use will be limited. Each student is required to carry out a project on his/her own protein of interest. Each participant asks a specific question about a protein and then uses the techniques covered in the course to address the question. Lectures and laboratory.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a CHEM 690 number may not take this course for credit.
Theses, Seminars, Comprehensive Exam and Special Courses
CHEM 655 Master’s Research and Thesis (33 credits)
CHEM 666 MSc Seminar (3 credits)
SPAN 601 Discourse Analysis and Research Methods (3 credits)
SPAN 603 Introduction to the Pedagogy of Spanish (3 credits)
Twelve credits of elective courses may be chosen from the following list:
SPAN 605 Independent Study (3 credits)
SPAN 621-630 Topics in Applied Linguistics and the pedagogy of Spanish (3 credits)
SPAN 631-640 Topics in Spanish Translation (3 credits)
SPAN 641-650 Topics in Critical Thinking and Theory (3 credits)
SPAN 651-660 Topics in the Subject and Identity (3 credits)
SPAN 661-670 Topics in Exile and Marginality (3 credits)
SPAN 671-680 Topics in History of Ideas in the Hispanic World (3 credits)
SPAN 681 Research Seminar (3 credits)
SPAN 698 Topics in Current Research (3 credits)
Note 1: Subject matter in “topics” courses varies from term to term and from year to year. Details of the courses to be given together with their respective course contents will be available at the beginning of the academic year.
Note 2: In consultation with the Graduate Program Director, students may replace up to 6 credits of reading courses, or credits at the graduate level in another discipline. Permission of the Graduate Program Director of the respective program must also be granted. Interdisciplinary courses, where relevant to the student’s program, may include courses at the graduate level in the Departments of Communication Studies, Education, English, Études françaises, Philosophy, Sociology and Anthropology, and Religions and Cultures. Approval of courses from these departments will be sought on a per-case basis.
Note 3: Students who wish to concentrate in Pedagogy or Translation may take six credits at the graduate level in the department relative to their concentration.
Twenty-seven credits in:
SPAN 694 Thesis Proposal (3 credits)
SPAN 695 Thesis (24 credits)
OR:
SPAN 682 Research Paper I (12 credits)
SPAN 683 Research Paper II (15 credits)
Course Descriptions
SPAN 601 Discourse Analysis and Research Methods (3 credits)
This course is designed to provide both a broad theoretical introduction and concrete practice in the research and analysis of literary and cultural texts. Students consider, critique, and incorporate theory and criticism into the articulation and elaboration of an analytical essay. They also implement fundamental research practices such as performing bibliographical searches and documentation; implementing narrative, argumentative, and persuasive rhetorical strategies; and, finally, developing a rigorously defended and coherent argument.
SPAN 603 Introduction to the Pedagogy of Spanish (3 credits)
In this course, students learn and implement important aspects of teaching methodology and techniques. Opportunities for observation of Spanish classes are provided. Students apply the techniques learned in micro-teaching and peer teaching exercises. Assignments include lesson planning and the evaluation of teaching performance. This course will be offered in the first semester of every year. In order to integrate practice into the curriculum, an effort will be made to offer students an opportunity to teach an Introductory Spanish language course.
SPAN 605 Independent Study (3 credits)
Under the supervision of a faculty member, the student undertakes research in a defined topic related to the student’s interest and the faculty member’s field of specialization. A final research paper is required.
SPAN 621-630 Topics in Applied Linguistics and the Pedagogy of Spanish (3 credits)
The courses in this area address different theoretical aspects of Spanish pedagogy, such as learning theories, curriculum planning, interlanguage development, the teaching and learning of phonology, phonetics, grammar, and vocabulary acquisition.
SPAN 631-640 Topics in Spanish Translation (3 credits)
Courses in this thematic area will explore different theoretical aspects of translation, such as languages in contact (bilingualism, interpretation, Chicano/a literature, contrastive grammars), diachronic and synchronic linguistic variation and its representation in time and space, as well as provide students with the opportunity to practice their translation skills.
SPAN 641-650 Topics in Critical Thinking and Theory (3 credits)
Through the study of cultural discourses of the Hispanic world, this thematic area aims to improve the understanding and praxis of rational analysis and argumentation, as well as to examine the intimate relationship between linguistic/language theory and cultural analysis. Topics may include rhetoric, pragmatics and hermeneutics, as well as the analytical practices of a number of linguistic and literary theorists.
SPAN 651-660 Topics in the Subject and Identity (3 credits)
This area examines the artistic, literary and philosophical conceptualizations of subject and identity in the Hispanic world, including the problematics of gender, the (visual) image, the gaze, the body, etc. Topics may include the image of the gendered subject, analyses of dramatic works and film, the ‘visibility’ of the subject in the media, literature and/or paraliterature of a period and/or geographical area.
SPAN 661-670 Topics in Exile and Marginality (3 credits)
This thematic area examines exile as an epistemological, ontological, aesthetic, linguistic and political category within the Hispanic world. Courses may concentrate on writers and/or artists in exile, political and national identity, as well as gender issues in different eras and geographical spaces. Topics may include the examination of discourses of crisis in different eras: modernization; testimonio literature; the boom; the Chicano world and its reality; postmodernism/colonialism.
SPAN 671-680 Topics in History of Ideas in the Hispanic World (3 credits)
This area examines the philosophical and ideological bases of artistic expression in the Hispanic world, in its European, American and Asian contexts. Topics may include the Caliban/Ariel dichotomy in Latin America, the rhetoric of independence and revolution, modernity/postmodernity. Poetic and essayistic discourses of Spain and Spanish America form the corpus for this area.
SPAN 681 Research Seminar (3 credits)
Students meet with peers and faculty for discussion and presentation of their current research.
SPAN 682 Research Paper I (12 credits)
Under the supervision of a faculty member, students undertake a substantial research project, to be completed by the preparation of a research paper.
SPAN 683 Research Paper II (15 credits)
Under the supervision of a faculty member, students undertake a research project, to be completed by the preparation of a research paper.
SPAN 694 Thesis Proposal (3 credits)
Under the supervision of a thesis supervisor, the student writes a proposal presenting a research topic, whose overall goal is to demonstrate that the student is capable of undertaking an independent research project. In the proposal, the student provides: 1) the linguistic, cultural or literary phenomenon or corpus to be studied; 2) a critical and theoretical framework for the study; and 3) a preliminary bibliography. This proposal is submitted to the thesis director and Graduate Program Director for consideration.
SPAN 695 Thesis (24 credits)
The thesis consists of the formulation and presentation of the research results. Each thesis is examined by a committee consisting of the student’s supervisor and at least two other scholars from the department and/or scholars from relevant disciplines in other departments or institutions.
SPAN 698 Topics in Current Research (3 credits)
When offered, content will depend on the theme designated by the program.Students may re-register for this course, provided that the course content has changed. Change in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number.
COMS 800 Integrative Seminar (3 credits)
This course proposes to engage first-year students in an epistemological conversation concerning different approaches to the conceptualization of communication and to the range of research problematics elaborated in the field and in the program. The expected outcomes include: a broad understanding of the relations between different domains within the discipline; the ability to recognize the links between epistemological assumptions, theory construction, the formation of research problematics and methodological approaches; a familiarization with the main fields of strength within the program; and the development of the ability to engage in dialogue with colleagues in different domains of research.
COMS 835 Doctoral Pro-Seminar (3 credits)
Note: Students who have received credit for COMS 830 may not take this course for credit.
Elective Courses
COMS 805 Research Workshop (3 credits)
This research workshop is supervised by the student’s thesis director and is intended to respond to a particular need unfulfilled by the program. It can take various forms, namely a directed readings program, a specific project within a research group, an elective course (including a masters level course) or a research or creation internship. The research workshop must be defined in a specific agreement between the thesis supervisor and the student, which is approved by the program director and added to the student’s file.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a COMS 805 number may not take this course for credit.
COMS 822 Advanced Seminar in Research Methods I (3 credits)
This course provides an in-depth analysis of methodological problematics. Major contemporary methods of analysis are considered. Possible themes include research design, data-gathering techniques and instruments, and qualitative or quantitative procedures for data analysis. Specific topics may vary from year to year.
COMS 823 Advanced Seminar in Research Methods II (3 credits)
Students who have registered for COMS 822 must register for COMS 823 when taking a second Advanced Seminar in Research Methods course.
* Topics vary and are determined by the Joint Program Committee.
COMS 841 Cultural Industries (3 credits)
This course examines commodification and industrialization processes as well as the dissemination and consumption of culture within contemporary social formations, while focusing on one or more sectors of the cultural industries. The analytical approach considers themes such as characteristics of merchandising cycles, work and market organization, symbolic and cultural specificity of cultural-industries products, and relationships between technological innovation and cultural form.
COMS 842 Media Reception (3 credits)
This course examines media reception. It explores different theoretical and methodological approaches to the study of individual group practices and cultural consumption. The course looks at case-study material drawn from specific media or media genres (e.g. popular music, soap operas, children’s programming). The seminar considers such approaches as media ethnography, focus-group research, audience research, life histories, and other context specific micro-social approaches.
COMS 843 Communication Policy (3 credits)
This course examines the history and development of state intervention and regulation of the media. It may focus on communication policy nationally or internationally. The course considers such issues as the role of public policy in the development of public media and the public sphere, models of regulation and deregulation, the relations between regulatory agencies and interest groups, and the position of communication policies within larger governmental structures.
COMS 844 Uses of Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs) (3 credits)
Observing usage of information and communication objects and technical devices allows us to understand the effect of technologies within society. This course explores different theoretical and methodological approaches pertinent to analyzing ICT usages. With respect to course discussions and papers, particular attention may be paid to the interaction between user and technical device; articulation between artifact user and creator; usage situation within the organizational context; embedding of political dimensions in technological design; usage micro-situations and macro-sociological issues. Some major research traditions may be introduced, namely, dissemination of artifacts, sociotechnical innovation, common practices and significations, pragmatic approaches, social and socio-political appropriation of usages.
COMS 851 Speech Communication (3 credits)
This course examines discourse as action. Forms of discourse considered may range from interpersonal communication to public address. Possible theoretical approaches include ethnomethodology, conversational analysis, rhetorical theory, and performance studies.
COMS 853 Discourse and Representation (3 credits)
The course examines discourse with respect to representation. It focuses on the structuring of knowledge and identity within sign systems. Emphasis may range from the cognitive and psychological to the social and cultural.
COMS 854 Discourse within Social Formations (3 credits)
This course examines discourse as social mediation. Possible themes include the interrelation of power and knowledge, the organization of culture through signifying practices, and the production of discourse and social institutions.
COMS 861 Organizational Culture (3 credits)
This course examines how cultural analysis can be brought to bear in understanding organizational life. To this end, a range of theoretical approaches are drawn upon, including conversational analysis, ethnography, ethnomethodology, symbolic interactionism, enactment theory, and socio-linguistics. Aspects of organizations such as norms, rituals, folklore, traditions, common ideals, ideologies, shared symbols, core values and interaction are given particular attention.
COMS 864 Communication and Change in Organizations (3 credits)
This course addresses a major question within organizations at both theoretical and practical levels. It focuses on issues of innovation or transformation in an organizational framework using various approaches (functionalist, critical, post-modern, constructivist, interpretative). This perspective is pertinent for analyzing the context and process of change within cultural or development organizations as well as private, public or charitable undertakings.
COMS 873 Identities and Cultural Exchange (3 credits)
Within the context of electronic, information, and market-globalization forces, traditional geopolitical borders have become porous and easily penetrable. This course focuses on the hybrid identities emergent and negotiated from cross-cultural engagements and transnational communication at the beginning of the 21st century. Curricular materials include theoretical readings, case studies, and audiovisual materials focused on bridging cultural and political gaps.
COMS 874 Globalization of Communication (3 credits)
This course examines the emergence of a global communication system. Possible topics include international information flow, the circulation of communication products and communication issues as they are reflected in international accords and debates, and the role of media in issues of cultural development, democratization, and resistance to globalization.
COMS 875 Technology and Organization (3 credits)
This course analyzes and critiques various theoretical approaches which account for the relationship between technology and organization. It also provides the grounds for a communicational reflection on phenomena associated with the presence of information and communication technologies within organizations.
COMS 876 Media Technology as Practice (3 credits)
This course examines relationships between theory and practice in the work of individuals and groups of media practitioners across a range of genres and working contexts. Analysis can focus on the organization of the workplace, the creative process and social forces influencing media praxis.
COMS 877 International Communication and Development (3 credits)
This course traces the history of the different paradigms related to communication and development. It proposes a critical analysis of the theoretical perspectives suggested in both Southern and Northern contexts. The topics considered include Canadian and foreign institutions, policies, and programs, the role of international fora, as well as globalization and development. Case studies may focus on a specific region of the world.
COMS 878 Communication, Conflict and Peace (3 credits)
This course examines the various ways in which discourses of war, conflict, and peace are constructed and relayed through the mass media and other forms of technologically-mediated communication. In particular, how do the inherent properties of different modes of communication intersect with larger discursive formations to reproduce dominant definitions and unquestioned categories of social knowledge related to issues of peace and conflict? What role do the media play in shaping our understanding of war and warfare? How does the internet contribute to promoting both conflict and peace? How is peace represented as an end state that is desirable; for whom is peace being constructed; and what are the kinds of actions being promoted or encouraged in the name of peace?
COMS 879 Human-Computer Interactions (3 credits)
This seminar examines human-computer interaction models and research in various fields of media communication; virtual worlds, e-commerce, distance education, sharing of knowledge and resources, adaptive technologies, systems intelligence and customization. Other topics include principles of interface design and assessment in cognitive ergonomics.
COMS 880 Communication Networks and Organization (3 credits)
This course examines and analyzes communication networks in a constructivist perspective with respect to two main “social-networks” traditions (anthropological and structural). It considers communication networks according to the themes explored by scholars in the field such as diffusion, social support and capital, organizational phenomena, social movements or ICTs. The seminar also includes methodological aspects of the study of communication networks, their emergence, and their transformation.
COMS 882 Communication, Democracy and Power (3 credits)
This course considers the communicative structure and performance of democracy within modern society. Attention is paid to the discursive resources available to perform and affect democracy, the constitution of democratic agents, the role of media in constituting and maintaining a public sphere, communicative strategies, norms of regulation and power, the performance of difference and various aspects of public culture.
COMS 883 History and Historiography of Media and Culture (3 credits)
This course examines the development of communication technologies and the media in comparative and historical perspective. Themes of time, space, place and power and their reconfiguration in relation to media and communication are given particular attention. Class members are encouraged to think about how they might engage in research on the history of media as part of their dissertation projects. To this end, historiographical issues are examined throughout the course, along with methodological consideration given to how one works with documentary and archival records.
COMS 884 Cultural Theory in Communication Studies (3 credits)
This course introduces students to cultural studies and its entwinement with the development of the field of communications. Key readings in Marxist approaches to culture, British Cultural Studies, and its US and Canadian variants are covered in the first half of the course. The remaining weeks expand the national and conceptual specificity of the “cultural studies tradition.” Topics include cultural and representational politics, issues of identity, resistance, hegemony, and ideology.
COMS 885 Popular Culture (3 credits)
This course focuses upon the political dimension of popular culture and the intellectual challenges it poses to scholarship. It concentrates upon the conceptual and historical aspects of the study of popular-cultural forms, their production and consumption, as well as their assessment. The course introduces key ideas and issues in popular-cultural studies, beginning with the rise of interest in mass culture during the late-19th and early-20th centuries. It also encounters modes of examining and understanding popular texts and sites of popular consumption. Issues of subjectivity, community, ideology, cultural hierarchies, and mass society are addressed.
COMS 886 Alternative Media (3 credits)
This course examines the array of alternative communication practices that inform social movements emerging from the margins. It focuses on the conditions of their effectiveness and mechanisms that facilitate or impede their success, such as the external social forces that influence their cooptation, commodification and evacuation of revolutionary potential.
COMS 887 Strategies and Styles in Communication (3 credits)
This course considers the strategies and styles of communication as intentional symbolic activity. Communication is examined as a practice that responds to and transforms situations and contexts. Emphasis is placed on the form, manner, and consequences of such practices, as well as on the major paradigms informing different approaches to the study of discourse and mediated messages.
COMS 888 Discourses of the Body (3 credits)
Critical theorists have identified the body as a site of competing and multiple discourses. The course examines some of the ways in which different bodies have been constructed in the media and how these both constrain and provide latitude for the expression of identities. A central area of inquiry is the context of the historical and contemporary terrain that informs the expression and categorization of these identities.
COMS 889 Theories of Organizational Communication (3 credits)
This course surveys and juxtaposes how some of the main approaches to organizational studies have dealt with issues related to communication. Paradigms considered may include scientific management, human relations, cybernetics, political economy, rational decision making, cultural studies, feminism, and post-modernism. An effort is made to examine how these various approaches emerged historically in relation to shifting patterns of power, inequality, and technological change. Issues such as the nature of bureaucracy, domination and resistance, systematically distorted communication, and public relations/external communication are addressed.
COMS 891 Communication Technologies and Society (3 credits)
This course introduces students to and contextualizes the main paradigms with respect to research on social, economic and cultural aspects of information and communication technologies. Critical analysis focuses on their epistemological assumptions and premises, main categories of analysis, and privileged issues. Attention is paid to the political economy of the information system.
COMS 892 Epistemology and Methodology of Media Creation (3 credits)
This seminar seeks to develop a position of poiesis (production) and to differentiate it from the position of aisthesis (reception). In order to define the multiple aspects of media creation, the following themes are discussed: creationistic accounts and theses; the spectacle as ritual, achievement and imitation of reality; agents, machines and living organisms; functions of transmitting information and storytelling. Operational concepts considered may include granularity, linearity, interactivity, diegesis, spatialization, indexicalization and enunciation.
COMS 893 Advanced Seminar in Special Topics in the PhD in Communication (3 credits)
This seminar permits the in-depth examination of particular special topics in media and communication. Topics vary from year to year.
Examinations and Thesis Work
COMS 815 Doctoral Examination (3 credits)
COMS 890 Doctoral Thesis Proposal (6 credits)
COMS 896 Doctoral Thesis Research (63 credits)
COMS 695 Thesis (21 credits)
Prerequisite: COMS 694.
The thesis is researched and written in the Fall and Winter of the second year of study. It is submitted in written form and is between 20,000 and 25,000 words in length. The thesis format must be commensurate with Graduate Studies regulations and in a format stipulated by the rules of the Thesis Office. The thesis submission normally follows the graduate academic calendar dates. The thesis is defended in an oral examination.
COMS 697 Research-Creation Thesis (21 credits)
Prerequisite: COMS 694.
Specifically designed for students with significant media production experience. During the Fall and Winter of the second year of study, students choosing Option III undertake a Research-Creation Thesis that deploys one or more media forms. The Research-Creation Thesis is comprised of an original media production or prototype in any genre, and a 10,000 word document comprising a literature and media review, a theoretical and methodological contextualization, a critical reflection on the research-creation and its outcomes, and other areas of analysis as deemed necessary by the student and the student’s Thesis Committee. The thesis submission normally follows the graduate academic calendar dates. The thesis is defended in an oral examination.
COMS 698 Major Research Paper (15 credits)
Prerequisite: COMS 600, 605, 610, plus 21 elective credits.
The Major Research Paper is an extended essay/project equivalent to 10,000 words on a topic chosen in consultation with a full-time faculty member. The Major Research Paper may commence from topics and materials from previous courses, it may involve a sustained literature review of a specific issue or problem, or it may be a thematic investigation of a topic pertaining to media or communication studies. With permission of the supervisor and the Graduate Program Director, the Major Research Paper may include a research-creation component. This course is available only to those registered in Option IV, is normally taken in term five, and may not be taken concurrently with other courses.
Note: Students who have received credit for COMS 695 or 697 may not take this course for credit.
ECON 805 Doctoral Comprehensive Examination (6 credits)
ECON 806 Doctoral Research Seminar (6 credits)
ECON 807 Doctoral Thesis (48 credits)
ECON 814 Workshop in Advanced Economic Theory
Prerequisite: Permission of the department.
The workshop is designed for PhD students who have successfully completed their comprehensive examinations and have expressed an interest in Economic Theory. The course involves lectures by participating faculty members and continues with presentations by students. These presentations may involve the student’s own work or an already published paper of great importance to the literature. Topics vary from year to year, with some years devoted to micro-topics and others to macro-topics.
Note: Students who have received credit for this course under ECON 614 may not take this course for credit.
ECON 817 Advanced Macro Theory
Prerequisite: ECON 616.
The course deals with the New Classical and New Keynesian macroeconomics, rational expectations and disequilibrium approaches. Emphasis is placed on model solution techniques, optimal control theory, and stochastic processes. Recent developments in empirical estimation will also be dealt with.
Note: Students who have received credit for ECON 617 may not take this course for credit.
ECON 858 Montreal Natural Resources and Environmental Economics Workshop
Prerequisite: Permission of the department.
This workshop, which is organized through the Centre Interuniversitaire de Recherche en Economie Quantiative (CIREQ), is intended for researchers and doctoral students in economics throughout Montreal who are interested in resource and environmental economics. The types of topics that may be dealt with, at an advanced level, are the economic theory of sustainable growth, green accounting, sunk costs and production constraints in natural resource exploitation, the irreversibility of environmental investment decisions, measures of biodiversity and their implications, the optimal order of extraction of natural resources, intertemporal depletion of spatially distributed nonrenewable resources, property rights and natural resource exploitation, applications of differential games to natural resource and environmental economics, and other related topics. The workshop is led by a team of researchers comprising professors from McGill University, Concordia University, Université de Montréal and HEC Montréal who will actively participate in each meeting. A regular and active participation is expected of the doctoral students and other researchers who would like to join this work group.
ECON 878 Workshop in Labour Economics
Prerequisite: Permission of the department.
The course covers topics related to specifying and estimating static and dynamic models of individual choice concerning education, occupation, labour supply, marriage, fertility, and immigration. Emphasis is placed on policy evaluation methods. The course covers both structural and nonstructural approaches. For each topic, theory, econometrics and applications are discussed. The course concludes with presentations by students of their on-going thesis work. The course is restricted to PhD students who plan to write a thesis in the field of labour economics. There is no textbook for this course. Instead, the course uses journal articles extensively to supplement the topics covered in the workshop.
ECON 703 Master’s Research Paper (21 credits)
Cognate Courses
In addition, graduate students in economics may be permitted to register for a limited number of courses offered in the MSc program in the John Molson School of Business. In all such cases, prior permission of the Department of Economics and the John Molson School of Business is required.
ECON 596 Natural Resource Economics (3 credits)
This course focuses on the problems of the finiteness of the natural resources base in Canada and in the world, and on an analysis of the demand for and supply of natural resources and energy. The course also discusses the economic aspects of a selected group of conservation measures (financial incentives, reallocation of property rights, regulation).
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a ECON 598 number may not take this course for credit.
EDUC 806 - Quantitative Methods (3 credits)
EDUC 807 - Qualitative Methods (3 credits)
EDUC 808 - Reporting Research (3 credits)
EDUC 809 - Advanced Issues in Education (3 credits)
9 credits of elective courses
EDUC 890 - Comprehensive Examination (12 credits)
Each candidate must successfully complete EDUC 890 before being admitted to candidacy for the degree. The comprehensive consists of a written and oral examination that tests the candidate on both general and area specific research. After successfully completing the comprehensive examination, the student is admitted to candidacy for the degree.
EDUC 891 - Doctoral Proposal (9 credits)
Note: the proposal is accepted only after the student is admitted to candidacy.
EDUC 895 - Doctoral Dissertation (48 credits).
A doctoral thesis is expected to make an original contribution to knowledge, and be presented in acceptable literary form.
Academic Regulations
Academic Standing. Please refer to the Academic Standing section of the Calendar for a detailed review of the Academic Regulations.
Residence. The minimum period of residence is two years (6 terms) of full-time study beyond the master’s degree, or the equivalent in part-time study. A minimum of one year of full-time study is highly recommended.
Time Limit. Please refer to the Academic Regulation page for further details regarding the Time Limit requirements.
Graduation Requirement. To graduate, students must have a cumulative GPA of at least 3.00.
Courses
Required Courses
Each course is worth 3 credits unless otherwise indicated.
EDUC 806 Quantitative Methods
Prerequisite: ETEC 641, or CHST 605 or permission of instructor.
This course builds students' capacity to conduct quantitative research in education at the doctoral level. It covers all topics related to experimental and quasi-experimental design and the application of univariate statistics to educational research problems. In doing so, the course addresses the basic theory underlying quantitative approaches, selection of an initial research question, the types of questions best suited to quantitative methods, managing and analyzing quantitative data, external and internal validity, reliability and objectivity. This course also provides opportunities to analyze quantitative data.
Note: Students who have received credit for EDUC 802 may not take this course for credit.
EDUC 807 Qualitative Methods
This course builds students’ capacity to conduct qualitative research in education at the doctoral level. It covers various types of qualitative research, such as ethnography, case studies, content analysis, and naturalistic observation. In doing so, the course addresses the basic theory and philosophy underlying qualitative approaches, selection of an initial research question, the types of questions best suited to qualitative methods, managing qualitative data, qualitative data analysis, and assuring the credibility and trustworthiness of qualitative data.
Note: Students who have received credit for EDUC 802 may not take this course for credit.
EDUC 808 Reporting Research
This course prepares students to report their research to various stakeholders of educational research, including funding agencies, other researchers, journal editors, policy makers, and the public. Students prepare various research-related documents, and provide peer reviews.
Note: Students who have received credit for EDUC 800 may not take this course for credit.
EDUC 809 Advanced Issues in Education
This seminar explores one or more complex issues of education that has implications for Applied Linguistics, Child Studies, Educational Studies, and Educational Technology. During the course, students explore the research and popular literature on the topic, critically examine the epistemological, sociological, and theoretical bases of the literature, and relate the lessons learned to their own proposed research projects.
Note: Students who have received credit for EDUC 801 or EDUC 805 may not take this course for credit.
EDUC 890 Comprehensive Examination (12 credits)
EDUC 891 Doctoral Proposal (9 credits)
EDUC 895 Doctoral Dissertation (48 credits)
Area Tutorials
The content and format of an area tutorial may vary from year to year, depending on the number of students and the availability of faculty members. All area tutorials involve directed reading, research, seminar presentations, and discussion sessions on selected topics within that problem area.
Area tutorials offered by the Department of Education fall into the following categories:
EDUC 810-824 Educational Technology Area Tutorials
EDUC 825-839 Child Studies Area Tutorials
EDUC 840-854 Educational Studies Area Tutorials
EDUC 855-869 Applied Linguistics Area Tutorials
Each course is worth 3 credits unless otherwise indicated.
EDUC 810-824 Educational Technology Area Tutorials
Area tutorials in Educational Technology are selected from topics related to the application of technology to education and training. These include Human Performance Technology (HPT); theory, development and research in educational media; distance education; educational cybernetics, systems analysis and design; and human resources development.
EDUC 825-839 Child Studies Area Tutorials
Area tutorials in Child Studies are selected from topics that focus on children’s typical and atypical learning and development (e.g., social or cognitive development), in a variety of settings and contexts (e.g., early childhood environments, schools, after-school programs, recreation and community settings, families and peers, special education environments).
EDUC 840-854 Educational Studies Area Tutorials
Area tutorials in Educational Studies consist of philosophical, historical, social psychological, sociological and anthropological aspects of education locally, nationally, and internationally. These may include, but are not limited to, comparative study or early childhood education thought and practice, multicultural education, policy and practice in diverse school settings, curriculum issues and indigenous knowledge, mediated learning environments, curriculum theory, moral education, issues of difference in sexual orientation, class, race, and gender.
EDUC 855-869 Applied Linguistics Area Tutorials
Area tutorials in Applied Linguistics consist of a variety of topics related to second-language learning and teaching. More specifically they may focus on interlanguage development; teaching of pronunciation; role of routinization in language acquisition; acquisition of second language vocabulary; teaching and learning of second language phonology.
APLI 604 Applied Language Studies (3 credits)
This course examines the different theoretical concepts and methods used to analyze and describe the linguistic structure of language, and explores ways in which these can be applied to the teaching of second languages. The course introduces students to the key concepts that characterize the different components of language, namely phonology, morphology, syntax and semantics, within an approach that recognizes that languages can be affected by the social, psychological, and pragmatic aspects of human behaviour.
APLI 621 Issues in Second Language Acquisition (3 credits)
Research in second language acquisition (SLA) is surveyed in this course. Students read, critique, and discuss a number of research reports and survey articles on topics including research techniques in SLA, individual differences believed to affect success in second language learning (e.g., age, motivation), the systematicity of learner language (interlanguage, developmental sequences), the influence of learners’ first language on the structure of their interlanguage, the development of general theories of SLA. The course concludes with a discussion of SLA research carried out in classroom settings.
APLI 660 Research Methods I (3 credits)
The principal aims of the course are to enable students better to evaluate reports of empirical research in the language sciences and to plan limited studies of their own. Emphasis is placed upon the logic of research designs, the nature of scientific proof, and the assumptions underlying data analytic procedures. Case studies of published research, readings and lectures illustrate the concepts of data, scales, models, sampling, theory, description, estimation and significance testing.
Cluster Courses
Thesis students take a minimum of one course from each cluster; non-thesis students take a minimum of two courses from each cluster.
Cluster A: Focus on Theory
APLI 623 Sociolinguistic Aspects of Bilingualism and Multilingualism
This course is an introduction to educational and sociolinguistic issues affecting the promotion and maintenance of individual and societal bilingualism, multilingualism, and multiculturalism. The societal consequences of being multilingual and multicultural and the perspectives of both students and educators in multilingual/multicultural language classrooms will be examined.
Note: Students who have received credit for APLI 642 may not take this course for credit.
APLI 624 Psycholinguistic Aspects of Second Language Acquisition
Prerequisite: APLI 660 (previously or concurrently).
This course examines issues in second language acquisition and bilingualism/multilingualism from a cognitive (psycholinguistic) perspective. The aim of the course is to familiarize students with basic psycholinguistic concepts of language representation and use, focusing on the learning of different aspects of language, the role of attention and memory in language acquisition, the development of language comprehension and production skills, and the cognitive consequences of bilingualism/multilingualism. Throughout the course, emphasis is given to understanding research methodologies used in psycholinguistic investigations.
Note: Students who have received credit for APLI 642 may not take this course for credit.
APLI 626 Variationist Second Language Acquisition
The acquisition of a second language is a process that is inherently variable due to factors such as the influence of the learner’s first language, the target language, extralinguistic variables, and other factors. This course examines the interplay of these variables, focusing on current research in variable second language acquisition and on the pedagogical implications and applications of this knowledge for second language teaching.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under an APLI 651 number may not take this course for credit.
APLI 627 Individual Differences in Second Language Acquisition
The course provides an overview of learners’ individual differences in cognitive, social, affective, and motivational variables and the role of those differences in second language teaching and learning. Course topics may include language aptitude, motivation, learning and cognitive styles, personality, and language learning strategies. The course offers a research-based framework for understanding how individual differences impact language learning for different learners in various learning contexts.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under an APLI 651 number may not take this course for credit.
APLI 634 Cross-Linguistic Influence
Prerequisite: APLI 604.
This course provides an overview of different perspectives that have been taken on the ways previously learned languages affect the learning of subsequent languages. Topics include: the contrastive analysis and error analysis approaches; avoidance; markedness; selective, bidirectional, and conceptual transfer; and factors affecting cross-linguistic influence among trilingual and multilingual speakers. Throughout the course, the implications for language teaching of the theoretical perspectives and empirical findings are considered.
Cluster B: Focus on Language
APLI 601 Phonological Aspects of Second Language Acquisition
Prerequisite: APLI 604 (previously or concurrently).
This course is an introduction to second language phonology, with emphasis on how theoretical knowledge and research can be applied to the teaching of pronunciation in traditional and computer-based environments. This course familiarizes students with the English sound system and associated phonetic phenomena, research in the development of second language phonology, and key concepts in phonemic representation, production and perception.
APLI 610 Teaching and Learning Second Language Vocabulary
Prerequisite: APLI 604 (previously or concurrently).
The course provides an overview of research perspectives on second language vocabulary acquisition. Topics include the characteristics of lexis, the structure of the mental lexicon, implicit and explicit learning, and issues in assessment. The course also outlines a research-informed approach to instruction: in addition to examining both old and new techniques for teaching vocabulary, it explores developments in corpus linguistics that are relevant to vocabulary instruction and materials design.
APLI 616 Pedagogical Grammar
Prerequisite: APLI 604 (previously or concurrently).
This course surveys the theoretical and empirical literature related to the teaching and learning of grammar in second language classrooms. Topics include the nature of pedagogical rules, the use of metalinguistic terminology, teachers’ knowledge and beliefs, learner characteristics, task types, and sequencing. Students also study a grammar structure in depth for which they subsequently develop, pilot, and critically evaluate a set of instructional materials.
APLI 636 Language Awareness
This course focuses on current research and practice in language awareness relating to language teaching and learning for a variety of learners in different contexts. Topics may include the learning of first, second and additional languages, language teaching methodology, language teacher education, attitudes towards language, cross-linguistic and cross-cultural awareness, and critical language awareness. Throughout the course, emphasis is placed on both the theoretical and practical implications of language awareness.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under an APLI 651 number may not take this course for credit.
APLI 643 Pragmatics and Second Language Acquisition
The course provides an overview of pragmatics, which includes topics ranging from reference, implicature, presupposition, speech acts, information structure, and conversational structure. The course also provides a research-informed approach to the study of these topics in second language learning contexts, exploring developments in second language research that are relevant to the understanding of pragmatics.
Cluster C: Focus on Pedagogy
APLI 625 Second Language Speaking and Listening
The course provides an overview of several topics in second language listening and speaking such as fluency, formulaic language, strategies, and inferencing. The course provides a research-informed approach to second language listening and speaking, exploring trends in second language acquisition research and pedagogy that are relevant to the understanding of skill development.
APLI 630 Second Language Syllabus Design and Curriculum Planning
The aims of the course are to examine the evolution of the syllabus in second language teaching and to consider issues related to the development, planning and implementation of language programs in a range of educational settings. Topics include the history of second language teaching; current issues in pedagogical practice; assessment of student needs; and the design, sequencing, and evaluation of language teaching materials.
Note: Students who have received credit for APLI 638 may not take this course for credit.
APLI 635 Language Assessment
The course provides an overview of theory and research that informs language testing. Students explore historical developments in language assessment as well as current trends. The course enables them to critically evaluate a range of test types including standardized placement instruments, diagnostic tests, progress/achievement measures, and non-traditional assessment techniques. Students are guided in designing sample tests; they are also familiarized with established methods for analyzing test items and interpreting results.
APLI 644 Technology in Language Learning
This course explores theoretical and applied issues related to the use of technology in second language learning and teaching. The principal aims of the course are to enable students to critically evaluate existing instructional uses of technology and to design methodologically sound technology-based materials for second language teaching. Emphasis is placed on developing skills needed for the integration of instructional technology into second language instruction.
APLI 646 Literacy (3 credits)
This course examines the development of reading and writing abilities in a second language, including the connections between the two. It discusses literacy issues pertaining to different age groups and proficiency levels, including university students acquiring advanced academic writing skills. Throughout the course, the implications for language teaching of the different theoretical and empirical findings will be considered.
APLI 647 Supervision of Practice Teaching
This course is designed for students who have some ESL teaching experience and a particular interest in working in the field of teacher training. The course has both a practical and a theoretical component. In the practical component, students observe and assist novice ESL teachers; in the theoretical component, students meet weekly in an academic seminar.
Elective Courses
Each year the department offers a selection of courses from those listed below. All courses are worth 3 credits unless otherwise noted.
APLI 641 Research Methods II
Prerequisite: APLI 660.
The principal aims of the course are to enable students to evaluate the statistical information provided in reports of empirical research in the social sciences and use statistics in small scale studies. Emphasis is placed upon the logic of statistical tests, the assumptions underlying their use, and the interpretation of the results. The course also includes basic elements of data analysis and synthesis in research employing qualitative methodologies.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under an APLI 651 number may not take this course for credit.
APLI 651 Special Topics in Applied Linguistics
This course provides an advanced treatment of specialized literature in an area of Applied Linguistics.
APLI 671 Reading Course in Applied Linguistics I
APLI 672 Reading Course in Applied Linguistics II
APLI 673 Reading Course in Applied Linguistics III
APLI 674 Reading Course in Applied Linguistics IV
APLI 675 Reading Course in Applied Linguistics V (6 credits)
Thesis
APLI 690 Thesis Proposal (3 credits)
APLI 691 Thesis (18 credits)
APLI 696 Research Paper (12 credits)
CHST 695 Internship Seminar and Field Placement (9 credits)
Prerequisite: CHST 605 and CHST 606, or equivalent.
The internship is designed to provide students with the opportunity to investigate an applied problem or topical issue in child studies. Course requirements include a seminar in both terms. In the first term, students are required to keep a journal, conduct on-site observations, and formulate a written proposal for the internship project. In the second term, students will conduct their project and maintain their journal. Students are required to spend a minimum of 75 hours in the field placement in the first term and an additional 125 hours (minimum) in their second term.
CHST 696 Internship Report (9 credits)
The final report is a detailed record of the internship project and includes a description and analysis of all work produced for the field placement. In addition, all instruments, curricular materials, journal entries, and other supporting documents are included in the final report.
Thesis Option
CHST 697 Thesis Proposal (3 credits)
Under the supervision of a thesis supervisor, the student writes a proposal presenting a research topic; the overall goal of which is to demonstrate that the student is capable of undertaking an independent research project.
CHST 698 Research and Thesis (18 credits)
The thesis consists of the formulation and presentation of the research results which are then defended before a committee consisting of the student’s supervisor and at least two other scholars from the department and/or scholars from relevant disciplines in other departments or institutions.
ESTU 690 Thesis and Tutorial (21 credits)
ESTU 692 Directed Study (with Extended Essay or Research Project) (12 credits)
ETEC 613 Learning Theories (3 credits)
The primary goal of the course is for students to develop a critical understanding of classic and contemporary theories of learning, such as behaviourism, cognitivism, neo-cognitivism, and socio-constructivism as they inform instructional practice. Secondary course goals include enhancing students' abilities to: a) read and evaluate the primary literature in the area; b) present and write within the discipline; c) evaluate applications of theory to practice; and d) collaborate professionally including via computer conferencing.
ETEC 640 Research Methods I (3 credits)
This course provides an introduction to research methodologies germane to the field of educational technology.  Students acquire competencies in analyzing, synthesizing and evaluating empirical research that employ quantitative, qualitative and mixed methodologies.  Special emphasis is placed on acquiring skills to critique and review literature in educational technology.
Note: Students who have recieved credit for ETEC 548/648 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 641 Research Methods II (3 credits)
Prerequisite: ETEC 640.
The principal aims of the course are to enable students to evaluate the statistical information provided in reports of empirical research in the social sciences and use statistics in small scale studies. Emphasis is placed upon the logic of statistical tests, the assumptions underlying their use, and the interpretation of the results. The course also includes basic elements of data analysis and synthesis in research employing qualitative methodologies.
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 548/648 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 650 Fundamentals of Instructional Design (3 credits)
This course introduces students to instructional design, which refers to both the systematic process for preparing learning materials as well as to the theories and principles that guide that work. Working on a real-world project, students directly engage in the process and prepare an instructional program.
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 512/712 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 651 Fundamentals of Human Performance Technology (3 credits)
Prerequisite: ETEC 650.
Building on the base of instructional design, this course introduces human performance technology (HPT). HPT is a set of principles and methods for identifying and solving problems that cannot be solved through instructional programs alone.  Working on a real-world project, students design a variety of non-instructional interventions.
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 512/712 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 671 Administering Educational Technology Groups (3 credits)
This course prepares students to integrate into the real-world practice of educational technology and to eventually assume leadership positions in organizations.  Through readings, experiential learning activities, and other assignments, this course introduces students to the basic themes of administering educational technology groups:  (a) business management—successfully competing for work and resources needed to complete it; (b) project management—planning work and overseeing its progress; and (c) people management—establishing and managing expectations of, and relationships with, members of the group.
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 591/701 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 672 Project Management (3 credits)
This course focuses on project management and its application to the fields of education and training.  Special attention is placed on the different components of a project, but reviews of project management as a discipline, a process and a system are also undertaken. Following the established methodology proposed by national and international project management organizations, this course introduces the processes, skills, techniques and software tools required to effectively manage a project.  Specific educational examples and cases of real-life projects are included in the course to describe how project management techniques can be used in education and training.
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 594/704 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 673 Consulting Skills for Educational Technologists (3 credits)
Prerequisite: ETEC 650.
This course prepares educational technologists to adopt the consultative approach that is central to the profession. Specifically, this course develops the key competencies needed in consultative work in schools, higher education, workplace learning groups and non-profit organizations. These competencies include building awareness of the client organization, supporting clients in making effective choices, developing agreements with clients that include the scope, schedule and budget of projects, managing project communications and changes throughout a project, and interacting effectively with clients.
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 573 or for this topic under an ETEC 593/693 number may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 791 Internship (Non-Thesis Option) (15 credits)
ETEC 792 Internship Report (Non-Thesis Option) (3 credits)
ETEC 795 Thesis Proposal (3 credits)
ETEC 796 Thesis or Thesis-Equivalent (15 credits)
Elective Courses
The department currently offers the courses listed below. Each course is worth 3 credits unless otherwise indicated. The pattern of courses offered may vary from year to year. Detailed information on the courses offered in a given year is available from the department.
ETEC 607 Philosophical Issues in Educational Research
Note: Students who have received credit for ADIP 501 or ESTU 601 or ETEC 507 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 621 Educational Cybernetics
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 506/606 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 635 Principles of Educational Message Design
ETEC 636 Evaluation in Education and Training
ETEC 637 Educational Gaming and Modelling
ETEC 652 Knowledge Management
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 567/667 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 660 Introduction to Educational Computing
ETEC 662 Social Technologies and the Sociocultural Aspects of Learning
ETEC 665 Introduction to Digital Media in Education
ETEC 666 Comtemporary Use of Simulation in Training and Education
ETEC 669 Designing and Developing Interactive Instruction
ETEC 676 Human Resources Development
ETEC 680 Global Perspectives in E-Learning
Note: Students who have have received credit for ETEC 555/655 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 681 Fundamentals of Distance Education
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 592/702 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 690 Field Experience (for Option A-Thesis/Thesis-Equivalent only)
ETEC 691 Advanced Readings and Research in Educational Technology I
ETEC 692 Advanced Readings and Research in Educational Technology II
ETEC 693 Special Issues in Educational Technology
Cognate Courses
Graduate students in educational technology may be permitted to register for up to two elective courses (6 credits) offered in other graduate programs. In all such cases, prior permission of the Graduate Program Director is required.
ETEC 513 Learning Theories (3 credits)
The primary goal of the course is for students to develop a critical understanding of classic and contemporary theories of learning, such as behaviourism, cognitivism, neo-cognitivism, and socio-constructivism as they inform instructional practice. Secondary course goals include enhancing students' abilities to: a) read and evaluate the primary literature in the area; b) present and write within the discipline; c) evaluate applications of theory to practice; and d) collaborate professionally including via computer conferencing.
ETEC 550 Fundamentals of Instructional Design (3 credits)
This course introduces students to instructional design, which refers to both the systematic process for preparing learning materials as well as to the theories and principles that guide that work.  Working on a real-world project, students directly engage in the process and prepare an instructional program.
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 512/712 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 551 Fundamentals of Human Performance Technology (3 credits)
Prerequisite: ETEC 550.
Building on the base of instructional design, this course introduces human performance technology (HPT). HPT is a set of principles and methods for identifying and solving problems that cannot be solved through instructional programs alone. Working on a real-world project, students design a variety of non-instructional interventions.
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 512/712 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 571 Administering Educational Technology Groups (3 credits)
This course prepares students to integrate into the real-world practice of educational technology and to eventually assume leadership positions in organizations. Through readings, experiential learning activities, and other assignments, this course introduces students to the basic themes of administering educational technology groups: (a) business management—successfully competing for work and resources needed to complete it; (b) project management—planning work and overseeing its progress; and (c) people management—establishing and managing expectations of, and relationships with, members of the group.
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 591/701 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 572 Project Management (3 credits)
This course focuses on project management and its application to the fields of education and training. Special attention is made on the different components of a project, but reviews of project management as a discipline, a process and a system are also undertaken. Following the established methodology proposed by national and international project management organizations, this course introduces the processes, skills, techniques and software tools required to effectively manage a project. Specific educational examples and cases of real-life projects are included in the course to describe how project management techniques can be used in education and training.
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 594/704 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 573 Consulting Skills for Educational Technologists (3 credits)
Prerequisite: ETEC 550.
This course prepares educational technologists to adopt the consultative approach that is central to the profession. Specifically, this course develops the key competencies needed in consultative work in schools, higher education, workplace learning groups and non-profit organizations. These competencies include building awareness of the client organization, supporting clients in making effective choices, developing agreements with clients that include the scope, schedule and budget of projects, managing project communications and changes throughout a project, and interacting effectively with clients.
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 673 or for this topic under an ETEC 593/693 number may not take this course for credit.
Elective Courses
The department currently offers the courses listed below. Each course is worth 3 credits unless otherwise indicated. The pattern of courses offered may vary from year to year. Detailed information on the courses offered in a given year is available from the department.
ETEC 507 Philosophical Issues in Educational Research
There are a number of important philosophical questions that lie behind the everyday practice of education research. The questions include: What does it mean to say that research in education is “scientific”? Is science (and, by extension, educational research) really value neutral and objective? What kinds of education research should count as legitimate? In the first part of the course, various definitions of science, for example, those of Karl Popper and Thomas Kuhn, and some influential critiques of the scientific enterprise are examined. In the second part of the course, some of the ongoing debates about appropriate research methods in education are analyzed.
Note: Students who have received credit for ADIP 501 or ESTU 601 or ETEC 607 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 521 Educational Cybernetics
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 506/606 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 535 Principles of Educational Message Design
ETEC 536 Evaluation in Education and Training
ETEC 537 Educational Gaming and Modelling
ETEC 540 Research Methods I
This course provides an introduction to research methodologies germane to the field of educational technology. Students acquire competencies in analyzing, synthesizing and evaluating empirical research that employ quantitative, qualitative and mixed methodologies. Special emphasis is placed on acquiring skills to critique and review literature in educational technology.
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 548/648 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 541 Research Methods II
Prerequisite: ETEC 540.
In this course students develop a proposal, design a pilot study to investigate a research problem, and later analyze the data. Projects may use quantative or qualitative methodologies.
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 548/648 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 552 Knowledge Management
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 567/667 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 560 Introduction to Educational Computing
ETEC 562 Social Technologies and the Sociocultural Aspects of Learning
ETEC 565 Introduction to Digital Media in Education
ETEC 566 Comtemporary Use of Simulation in Training and Education
ETEC 569 Designing and Developing Interactive Instruction
ETEC 576 Human Resources Development
ETEC 580 Global Perspectives in E-Learning
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 555/655 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 581 Fundamentals of Distance Education
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 592/702 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 590 Field Experience
ETEC 593 Special Issues in Educational Technology
ENGL 800 Pro-Seminar I: Theory (3 credits)
This course is an advanced survey of literary theory, considering those thinkers whose work has been particularly influential for the discipline’s understanding of the nature and function of literature and its production. Figures to be studied may include Aristotle, Sidney, Nietzsche, Althusser, Lacan, Derrida, Barthes, Foucault, Deleuze, Irigaray, McLuhan, Badiou, Zizek, and Kristeva.
ENGL 801 Pro-Seminar II: Methodology (3 credits)
This course considers literary research under the aegis of a current or emergent methodological paradigm in the field e.g. Book History, Media Studies, Digital Humanities, Poetics, Psychoanalysis, Affect Theory, or Neuroaesthetics.
ENGL 802 Professional Development Workshops (1 credit)
The Department holds a series of workshops with the aim of introducing doctoral candidates to pertinent research, teaching, and professional expectations and enhancing career development. In order to graduate, all doctoral candidates must attend these workshops before the end of the sixth term. Master's students are also strongly encouraged to attend the relevant sessions since they are a constitutive component of graduate formation. If a student has attended a given workshop during his/her master's degree, he/she is exempted from that workshop.
Workshops are led by faculty members and organized by the Graduate Program Director on a monthly basis in anticipation both of key dates during the PhD program (e.g. external grant application due dates) and the future professional life of the doctoral candidate (e.g. academic job interviews). The course is graded on a pass/fail basis.
ENGL 890 Thesis Proposal (6 credits)
Students are admitted to candidacy for the PhD upon acceptance by their advisory committee of the written thesis proposal and its successful defence. The oral examination of the written thesis proposal normally takes place in the term following the writing of the field examinations.
ENGL 891 The Major Field Examination I (6 credits)
This course focuses broadly on the candidate’s primary area of specialization, covering major authors, genres, and issues and the pertinent canonical texts therein, in order to consolidate the necessary background knowledge for advanced literary research and teaching at the university level. In the examination, candidates are expected to demonstrate comprehensive knowledge of the designated field as well as an original, critical understanding of the field and its constitutive texts. The Department has established reading lists in nine broad areas of specialization that cover a variety of periods, nations, and subjects. These basic lists may be modified to suit the interests of individual candidates. A substitution of 20 per cent is permitted for all reading lists for the purposes of tailoring the lists to the interests of the student.  Such substitutions are to be determined by agreement between the student and the student's supervisor and are subject to approval by the Graduate Program Committee.
ENGL 892 The Sub-Field Examination II (6 credits)
This course is designed to cultivate a more specific area of inquiry that may include a body of literary texts in combination with readings in a particular set of methodological or theoretical problems to the end of developing a viable doctoral topic and composing a thesis proposal. The Sub-Field Examination list is established by the candidate in consultation with the doctoral supervisor and comprises approximately 60 items that are seen as directly relevant to the field in which the dissertation is oriented. It is divided into three sections: 1) approximately 20 literary texts; 2) approximately 20 theoretical/methodological texts; 3) approximately 20 texts drawn from adjacent and/or ancillary fields. By “text,” it means the number of poems or articles deemed by field specialists as sufficiently representative of an author's work or period. A text cannot appear twice on any of the lists, including that of the Major Field. The lists and texts are not exhaustive, but are meant to provide the student with the necessary initiation to sub-fields that help to clarify the direction and goals of the dissertation.
ENGL 895 Thesis Research (53 credits)
Doctoral students must submit a thesis based on their research and defend it in an oral examination.
Studies Courses (12 credits)
ENGL 801-804 Independent Study in English Literature
ENGL 601-604 Special Topics in English Literature
ENGL 605-609 Studies in Early English Literature and Medieval Literature
ENGL 610-614 Studies in Renaissance Literature
ENGL 615-619 Studies in Restoration and Eighteenth Century Literature
ENGL 620-624 Studies in Nineteenth Century Literature
ENGL 625-629 Studies in Twentieth Century Literature
ENGL 630-634 Studies in Poetry
ENGL 635-639 Studies in Drama
ENGL 640-644 Studies in Fiction
ENGL 645-649 Studies in the History of Ideas
ENGL 650-654 Studies in Shakespeare
ENGL 655-659 Studies in American Literature
ENGL 660-664 Studies in Canadian Literature
ENGL 665-667 Studies in Post-Colonial Literature
ENGL 668-669 Studies in Literary Criticism
ENGL 685-689 Studies in Selected Areas
ENGL 690 Thesis (24 credits)
ENGL 692 Creative Writing Thesis (21 credits)
ENGL 693 Bibliography (6 credits)
The annotated bibliography constitutes a preliminary phase of the research essay. A student must successfully complete the annotated bibliography before producing the research essay. The approximate length of the annotated bibliography is 3,000 words and is supervised by the supervisor of the research essay. The bibliography is assessed on a pass/fail basis.
ENGL 694 Research Essay (18 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGL 693.
A research essay of approximately 10,000 words is supervised by a member of the department and assessed by another faculty member acting as reader. The essay is assessed on a pass/fail basis.
FLIT 600 Méthodologie (3 crédits)
FLIT 601 Théories littéraires (3 crédits)
Séminaires de domaines généraux *
FLIT 605 Littérature et discours (3 crédits)
FLIT 614 Littérature et technologies (3 crédits)
FLIT 617 Textes et images (3 crédits)
FLIT 619 Littérature et société (3 crédits)
FLIT 620 Tutorat en littérature (3 crédits)
FLIT 621 Tutorat en littérature (3 crédits)
FLIT 622 Séminaire avancé en littérature, langue et traduction (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 622.
FLIT 630-639 Séminaire avancé en littératures francophones (3 crédits)
FLIT 640-649 Séminaire avancé en littérature québécoise (3 crédits)
FLIT 650-659 Séminaire avancé en écritures contemporaines (3 crédits)
FLIT 660-669 Séminaire avancé en littérature française (3 crédits)
Autres exigences
FLIT 690 Présentation du mémoire (OPTION A) (6 crédits)
FLIT 691 Présentation du mémoire incluant une réalisation médiatique (OPTION B) (6 crédits)
FLIT 692 Mémoire (OPTION A) (24 crédits)
FLIT 693 Mémoire incluant une réalisation médiatique (OPTION B) (24 crédits)
* Les séminaires de domaines généraux peuvent être suivis dans un autre département de l’Université Concordia ou dans d’autres universités, avec l’accord du directeur ou de la directrice du programme de deuxième cycle en littérature et celui du département concerné. Pour les deux options, un maximum de trois crédits de séminaires non obligatoires peut être remplacé par une lecture dirigée après l’obtention de la permission du directeur ou de la directrice du 2e cycle de littérature.
FLIT 600 Méthodologie (3 crédits)
Dans ce séminaire, l’étudiante ou l’étudiant apprend à formuler des problématiques et à discuter d’hypothèses de recherche. Les étudiants se familiarisent également avec les outils de recherche bibliographique imprimés et informatiques, les règles de présentation de la bibliographie et les principaux types de productions écrites liées à la critique littéraire.
FLIT 601 Théories littéraires (3 crédits)
Ce séminaire permet à l’étudiante ou à l’étudiant d’approfondir sa connaissance de diverses théories littéraires, en tenant compte des approches les plus classiques comme des plus récentes. Le séminaire vise également à explorer le passage de la théorie à la pratique dans l’analyse des textes.
FLIT 605 Littérature et discours (3 crédits)
Ce séminaire s’intéresse à l’interaction dynamique de la littérature avec les diverses formes de discours en circulation dans l’espace social.
FLIT 614 Littérature et technologies (3 crédits)
Dans ce séminaire, on réfléchit à l’impact des technologies sur la littérature. On y étudie les formes littéraires et artistiques nées de l'évolution récente des dispositifs de lecture et d’écriture, ainsi que les modes de diffusion inédits qui en découlent.
FLIT 617 Textes et images (3 crédits)
Ce séminaire est, pour l’étudiante ou l’étudiant, l’occasion d’étudier les rapports entretenus entre texte et l’image entendus dans leur sens large. Dans ce séminaire seront abordés des textes qui incorporent le visuel ou qui en dépendent, comme les textes littéraires illustrés et les bandes-dessinées.
FLIT 619 Littérature et société (3 crédits)
Ce séminaire est, pour l’étudiante ou l’étudiant, l’occasion de réfléchir à la sociologie littéraire, aux rapports entre l’œuvre et son public ou encore aux divers contextes de production, de diffusion, de réception ou de conservation du texte littéraire.
FLIT 620 Tutorat en littérature (3 crédits)
FLIT 621 Tutorat en littérature (3 crédits)
FLIT 622 Littérature, langue et traduction (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 622.
Le séminaire avancé de littérature, langue, et traduction vise à parfaire les connaissances de l’étudiante et de l’étudiant dans un domaine littéraire, traductologique ou linguistique spécifique envisagé sous un angle théorique, historique ou social. Pour animer ce séminaire, il sera fait appel aux professeurs du département en fonction de leur spécialité. Le sujet particulier du séminaire sera annoncé chaque fois que le séminaire sera donné.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FLIT 616 ou FTRA 616 ou FTRA 622 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FLIT 630-639 Séminaire avancé en littératures francophones (3 crédits)
Ce séminaire avancé vise à parfaire les connaissances de l’étudiante et de l’étudiant par une analyse en profondeur d’une thématique et d’un corpus particulier des littératures francophones.
FLIT 640-649 Séminaire avancé en littérature québécoise (3 crédits)
Ce séminaire avancé vise à parfaire les connaissances de l’étudiante et de l’étudiant par une analyse en profondeur d’une thématique et d’un corpus particulier de la littérature québécoise.
FLIT 650-659 Séminaire avancé en écritures contemporaines (3 crédits)
Ce séminaire avancé vise à parfaire les connaissances de l’étudiante et de l’étudiant par une analyse en profondeur d’une thématique et d’un corpus particulier des écritures contemporaines.
FLIT 660-669 Séminaire avancé en littérature française (3 crédits)
Ce séminaire avancé vise à parfaire les connaissances de l'étudiante et de l'étudiant par une analyse en profondeur d'une thématique et d'un corpus particulier de la littérature française.
FLIT 690 Présentation du mémoire (Option A) (6 crédits)
FLIT 691 Présentation du mémoire incluant une réalisation médiatique (Option B) (6 crédits)
FLIT 692 Mémoire (Option A) (24 crédits)
FLIT 693 Mémoire incluant une réalisation médiatique (Option B) (24 crédits)
FTRA 600 Méthodologie générale de la recherche en traduction (3 crédits)
Bloc B (9 cr. au choix)
FTRA 601 Courants contemporains en traductologie (3 crédits)
FTRA 602 Histoire générale de la traduction (3 crédits)
FTRA 603 Contextes socio-politiques de la traduction (3 crédits)
FTRA 610 Lecture critique de traductions (3 crédits)
FTRA 622 Littérature, langue, traduction (3 crédits)
Bloc C (3cr. au choix)
FTRA 636 Informatique et traduction (3 crédits)
FTRA 638 Initiation au sous-titrage (3 crédits)
FTRA 652 Traduction assistée par ordinateur (TAO) et post édition (3 crédits)
FTRA 655 Gestion de projets (3 crédits)
FTRA 658 Pratique de la localisation (3 crédits)
FTRA 668 Web, technologies, traduction : théories et critiques (3 crédits)
Bloc D (30 cr. obligatoires)
FTRA 611 Terminologie et mondialisation (3 crédits)
FTRA 612 Traduction avancée en sciences humaines et sociales (F) (3 crédits)
ou
FTRA 613 Advanced translation in social sciences and the humanities (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 614 Traduction littéraire avancée (F) (3 crédits)
ou
FTRA 615 Advanced literary translation (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 623 Traduction scientifique et technique du français à l’anglais (3 crédits)
ou
FTRA 624 Traduction scientifique et technique de l’anglais au français (3 crédits)
FTRA 625 Traduction commerciale et juridique du français à l’anglais (3 crédits)
ou
FTRA 626 Traduction commerciale et juridique de l’anglais au français (3 crédits)
FTRA 629 Révision et correction en traduction (A) (3 crédits)
ou
FTRA 630 Révision et correction en traduction (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 631 Initiation à la traduction générale (A) (3 crédits)
ou
FTRA 632 Initiation à la traduction générale (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 633 Aspects théoriques et pratiques de la terminologie (3 crédits)
FTRA 634 Traduction littéraire de l’anglais au français (3 crédits)
ou
FTRA 635 Traduction littéraire du français à l’anglais (3 crédits)
FTRA 647 Traduction économique du français à l’anglais (A) (3 crédits)
ou
FTRA 648 Traduction économique de l’anglais au français (F) (3 crédits)
Maîtrise en traductologie (théorique - avec mémoire) Option B
Le Département d’études françaises offre un programme de 2e cycle à visée théorique conduisant au doctorat : la maîtrise en traductologie, avec mémoire option B.
But du programme
Cette option offre une formation poussée favorisant la réflexion et l’acquisition de connaissances de pointe en traductologie aux étudiantes et aux étudiants qui ont réalisé leurs études antérieures en traduction ou dans une discipline proche de la traduction. Ces étudiants peuvent ainsi devenir des langagiers professionnels et poursuivre leurs études au doctorat.
Conditions générales d’admission
Les candidates et les candidats devront détenir un baccalauréat spécialisé (ou « Honours ») en traduction, un diplôme d’études supérieures en traduction, ou encore un baccalauréat ou un diplôme d’études supérieures dans un domaine pertinent à la traduction. Ils devront posséder les compétences linguistiques nécessaires à la traduction (maîtrise de la langue d’arrivée, compréhension fine de la langue de départ), avoir un excellent dossier universitaire (moyenne générale de 3 sur 4,3) et démontrer des aptitudes pour la traduction. La direction du programme pourra exiger qu’une candidate ou qu’un candidat suive au besoin une propédeutique.
La demande d’admission doit s’accompagner des pièces suivantes :
trois lettres de recommandation;
une lettre de présentation où la candidate ou le candidat décrit sa formation et son expérience dans les domaines langagiers ainsi que ses attentes à l’égard du programme;
des relevés de notes officiels de l’université ou des universités fréquentées.
La sélection des candidatures est effectuée sur la base des éléments suivants :
le dossier universitaire de la candidate ou du candidat;
les lettres de recommandation;
un examen d’admission qui vérifie les compétences linguistiques et culturelles de la candidate ou du candidat.
Rendement académique
Voir la section Academic Standing de l'Annuaire pour la Réglementation universitaire.
Toute note inférieure à C représente un échec. Le comité des études supérieures du Département revoit le dossier de chaque étudiante et de chaque étudiant tous les ans et peut exiger que celles et ceux dont les résultats ne satisfont pas aux normes du Département (moyenne générale de 3,0 sur 4,3) se retirent du programme.
Durée des études
La durée des études pour les étudiantes et étudiants à temps plein est d'un minimum de trois sessions et d'un maximum de douze sessions à partir de la date d'inscription. Pour les étudiantes et étudiants à temps partiel, le maximum est de quinze sessions.
Exigences du programme
Toute étudiante ou tout étudiant doit obtenir un minimum de 45 crédits.
Structure du programme
Toute étudiante ou tout étudiant est tenu à 15 crédits de séminaires, à 6 crédits de présentation du projet de mémoire et à 24 crédits de mémoire.
Séminaires obligatoires : 9 crédits
Séminaires à option : 6 crédits
Projet de mémoire : 6 crédits
Mémoire : 24 crédits
Séminaires
Les cours obligatoires sont des séminaires de fondement théorique et d’histoire de la traduction. Les cours au choix sont des séminaires spécialisés dans le domaine sociocritique et des séminaires de traduction en littérature et en sciences humaines.
Séminaires obligatoires (9 cr.)
FTRA 600 Méthodologie générale de la recherche en traduction (3 crédits)
FTRA 601 Courants contemporains en traductologie (3 crédits)
FTRA 602 Histoire générale de la traduction (3 crédits)
Séminaires au choix (6 cr.)
FTRA 603 Contextes socio-politiques de la traduction (3 crédits)
FTRA 610 Lecture critique de traductions (3 crédits)
FTRA 612 Traduction avancée en sciences humaines et sociales (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 613 Advanced translation in social sciences and the humanities (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 614 Traduction littéraire avancée (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 615 Advanced literary translation (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 622 Littérature, langue, traduction (3 crédits)
FTRA 680 Tutorat en littérature (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 681 Tutorial in literature (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 682 Tutorat en traduction (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 683 Tutorial in translation (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 684 Tutorat en linguistique (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 685 Tutorial in linguistics (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 698 Étude d’un sujet particulier / Special Topics (3 crédits)
Autres exigences (30 cr.)
FTRA 686 Projet de mémoire (6 crédits)
FTRA 692 Mémoire (24 crédits)
Nota : Les étudiantes et les étudiants admis en maîtrise peuvent bénéficier d’une aide financière pendant la durée de leurs études, sous la forme d’assistanats de recherche ou d’enseignement. Ces aides varient selon les années et les étudiantes et étudiants intéressés doivent se faire connaître auprès de la direction du programme une fois admis.
Cours et séminaires
FTRA 600 Méthodologie générale de la recherche en traduction (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 500.
Ce séminaire examine les principales méthodes et approches appliquées à l’étude de la traduction. Il trace l’émergence de la discipline autonome de la traductologie ainsi que ses liens actuels avec d’autres sciences humaines et sociales. À l’issue du séminaire, l’étudiante ou l’étudiant a une vue d’ensemble de la théorisation en traduction, ce qui lui permet de se spécialiser en connaissance de cause dans un domaine spécifique, en élaborant une problématique particulière cohérente avec les visées du programme et en empruntant les outils de recherche pertinents.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 500 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 601 Courants contemporains en traductologie (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 539.
Ce séminaire aborde les tendances qui marquent l’actualité de la recherche en traductologie. Sont explorées les nouvelles pratiques de la traduction et l’évolution des cadres conceptuels qui permettent de penser le transfert linguistique et culturel.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 539 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 602 Histoire générale de la traduction (3 crédits)
Ce séminaire est une introduction à l’histoire générale de la traduction, notamment (mais non exclusivement) en Occident, ainsi qu’à l’évolution des approches historiographiques. Une vue en coupe est présentée à travers des thématiques permettant de dégager le rôle historique joué par les traducteurs comme acteurs sociaux proches des pouvoirs en place ou critiques de ces pouvoirs. L’accent est mis sur la créativité des traducteurs à certaines époques clés de contacts entre des cultures. Le séminaire peut aborder certains domaines précis de la traduction et des travaux menés à des périodes historiques et dans des aires géographiques données.
FTRA 603 Contextes socio-politiques de la traduction (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 553.
Ce séminaire examine les situations sociales et politiques qui influent sur le travail pratique des traducteurs et la réception des traductions. Sont étudiés, par exemple,le cas des États bilingues ou multilingues, l'évolution des politiques linguistiques et leurs répercussions sur la traduction, les rapports entre les langues majoritaires et minoritaires, les effets de la migration sur les sociétés de plus en plus hybrides et les marchés nouveaux de la traduction.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 553 ou FTRA 550 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 610 Lecture critique de traductions (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 540.
Ce séminaire propose une étude critique des traductions de l’anglais au français et du français à l’anglais effectuées à travers l’histoire, en tenant compte de la diversité des visées esthétiques, des différentes stratégies de traduction, ainsi que des contraintes socio-politiques ou institutionnelles. L’accent est mis sur l’étude des « grandes traductions » dans les cultures d’expression anglaise et française.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 540 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 611 Terminologie et mondialisation (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 534.
Préalable : FTRA 533. Le cours porte sur certains points fins en terminologie et en terminographie modernes : synonymie, marques sociolinguistiques, néonymie, normalisation et internationalisation. Il traite spécifiquement du rôle de la terminologie dans la gestion de l’information unilingue et multi‑lingue dans les entreprises et dans les organismes nationaux et internationaux. L’aspect pratique prend, entre autres, la forme de rédaction de rapports de recherche et l’utilisation d’outils terminotiques. (F/A)
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 534 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 612 Traduction avancée en sciences humaines et sociales (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 613 Advanced translation in social sciences and the humanities (A) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 542 ou 543.
Ce séminaire pratique et théorique aborde plusieurs domaines des sciences humaines et sociales, notamment la sociologie, la psychanalyse, la théorie féministe. L’étudiante ou l’étudiant produit un commentaire analytique sur ses choix de traduction en s’efforçant de théoriser sa pratique de traducteur-traductrice. Le séminaire FTRA 612 a l’anglais comme langue de départ et le français comme langue d’arrivée (F); le séminaire FTRA 613 a le français comme langue de départ et l’anglais comme langue d’arrivée. (A)
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 542 ou FTRA 543 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 614 Traduction littéraire avancée (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 615 Advanced literary translation (A) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 544 ou 545.
Ce séminaire pratique et théorique analyse, à partir de théories littéraires contemporaines, un échantillon de textes à traduire. L’étudiante ou l’étudiant produit un commentaire analytique sur ses choix de traduction en s’efforçant de théoriser sa pratique de traducteur-traductrice. Le séminaire FTRA 614 a l’anglais comme langue de départ et le français comme langue d’arrivée (F), le séminaire FTRA 615 a le français comme langue de départ et l’anglais comme langue d’arrivée. (A)
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 544 ou FTRA 545 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 622 Littérature, langue, traduction (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FLIT 622.
Le séminaire avancé de littérature, langue et traduction vise à parfaire les connaissances de l’étudiante et de l’étudiant dans un domaine littéraire, traductologique ou linguistique spécifique envisagé sous un angle théorique, historique ou social. Pour animer ce séminaire, il sera fait appel aux professeurs du département en fonction de leur spécialité. Le sujet particulier du séminaire sera annoncé chaque fois que le séminaire sera donné.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 616, FLIT 616 ou FLIT 622 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 623 Traduction scientifique et technique du français à l’anglais (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 513.
Initiation aux différents problèmes de la traduction dans les langues de spécialité scientifiques et techniques (français-anglais). Le cours est divisé en deux ou trois parties, chaque partie correspondant à un domaine spécialisé en traduction (A).
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 513 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 624 Traduction scientifique et technique de l’anglais au français (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 514.
Initiation aux différents problèmes de la traduction dans les langues de spécialité scientifiques et techniques (anglais-français). Le cours est divisé en deux ou trois parties, chaque partie correspondant à un domaine spécialisé en traduction (F).
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 514 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 625 Traduction commerciale et juridique du français à l’anglais (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 515.
Initiation aux différents problèmes de la traduction dans les langues de spécialité de l’administration, du commerce et du droit (français-anglais). Le cours est divisé en parties, chaque partie correspondant à un domaine spécialisé en traduction (A).
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 515 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 626 Traduction commerciale et juridique de l’anglais au français (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 516.
Initiation aux différents problèmes de la traduction dans les langues de spécialité de l’administration, du commerce et du droit (anglais-français). Le cours est divisé en parties, chaque partie correspondant à un domaine spécialisé (F).
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 516 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 629 Révision et correction en traduction (A) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 529.
Ce cours aborde les différentes méthodes de révision et de correction de textes rédigés ou traduits en anglais; il sensibilise les étudiantes et étudiants aux aspects humains et techniques du métier de réviseure et de réviseur; on touche aussi aux problèmes de l’évaluation de la qualité des traductions (A).
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 529 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 630 Révision et correction en traduction (F) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 530.
Ce cours aborde les différentes méthodes de révision et de correction de textes rédigés ou traduits en français; il sensibilise les étudiantes et étudiants aux aspects humains et techniques du métier de réviseure et de réviseur; on touche aussi aux problèmes de l’évaluation de la qualité des traductions (F).
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 530 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 631 Initiation à la traduction générale (A) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 531.
Ce cours vise à initier les étudiantes et étudiants aux outils notionnels et linguistiques nécessaires pour traduire efficacement des textes d’ordre général. Il leur présente aussi les étapes du processus de la traduction et les familiarise avec les outils de travail de la traduction.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 531 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 632 Initiation à la traduction générale (F) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 532.
Ce cours vise à initier les étudiantes et étudiants aux outils notionnels et linguistiques nécessaires pour traduire efficacement des textes d’ordre général. Il leur présente aussi les étapes du processus de la traduction et les familiarise avec les outils de travail de la traduction.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 532 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 633 Aspects théoriques et pratiques de la terminologie (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 533.
Principes généraux de la terminologie; distinction entre langue générale et langues de spécialité; rapport entre documentation et terminologie; analyse terminologique; terminologie de traduction; supports terminographiques traditionnels et/ou informatisés; terminologie et aménagement linguistique.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 533 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 634 Traduction littéraire de l’anglais au français (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 504.
Sensibilisation aux problèmes spécifiques à la traduction littéraire. Travaux pratiques : traduction de textes de genres variés (F).
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 504 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 635 Traduction littéraire du français à l’anglais (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 501.
Sensibilisation aux problèmes spécifiques à la traduction littéraire. Travaux pratiques : traduction de textes de genres variés (A).
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 501 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 636 Informatique et traduction (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 536.
Ce cours porte sur la langue de l’informatique, la théorie et les concepts fondamentaux qui s’y rapportent. Il comporte des exercices de traduction et une initiation aux outils informatisés pour les traducteurs : Internet, bases de données, systèmes de traduction assistée,utilitaires. (F/A)
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 536 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 638 Initiation au sous-titrage (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 538.
Ce cours a pour but d’initier les étudiantes et étudiants à la traduction audiovisuelle, en particulier au sous-titrage. Il comporte un volet théorique, avec lectures et analyses, ainsi qu’un volet pratique où sont traités les principes et les conventions du sous-titrage, les aspects techniques et les genres cinématographiques. Sont aussi abordées la traduction de la voix hors-champ et les techniques d’accessibilité tels le sous-titrage pour malentendants et l’audiodescription.
FTRA 647 Traduction économique du français à l’anglais (A) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 547.
Sensibilisation aux problèmes que pose dans le domaine de l’économie la traduction du français à l’anglais. (A)
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 547 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 648 Traduction économique de l’anglais au français (F) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 548.
Sensibilisation aux problèmes que pose dans le domaine de l’économie la traduction de l’anglais au français. (F)
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 548 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 652 Traduction assistée par ordinateur (TAO) et post édition (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 552.
Préalable : FTRA 536 pour le diplôme en traduction.
Ce cours permet d’analyser les aspects morphologiques, lexicaux, syntaxiques et sémantiques des systèmes de traduction automatisée. L’étudiante et l’étudiant apprennent à appliquer les concepts analysés à un système commercialisé. Ils font des exercices simples de programmation portant sur des problèmes linguistiques; ils utilisent des outils de gestion et de traduction pour le matériel à localiser à l’aide de logiciels de localisation, de logiciels de terminologie et de mémoires de traduction. Ils évaluent et apprennent à réviser les sorties d'un système de traduction automatique, tout en mettant l'accent sur le contrôle de la qualité.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 552 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 655 Gestion de projets (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 555.
Ce cours traite de la gestion des projets de traduction/localisation multilingues, depuis la création de l’offre de services, jusqu’au contrôle de la qualité et de la livraison, en passant par la résolution de problèmes et la gestion en situation de crise. Il comprend une partie théorique et des mises en situation. Les étudiantes et étudiants se familiarisent avec l’évaluation des ressources (humaines et matérielles) nécessaires pour exécuter le travail, l’élaboration d’échéanciers et le suivi du budget. Ils apprennent à gérer les ressources affectées aux projets afin de pouvoir respecter le mandat qui leur est confié.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 555 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 658 Pratique de la localisation (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 558.
L’étudiante et l’étudiant apprennent dans ce cours les stratégies de localisation et les processus de localisation; la localisation de logiciels et de localisation de sites Web; les acteurs dans les projets de localisation; la situation et le travail du traducteur dans les projets de localisation; les types de fichiers à localiser : ressources, code source, fichiers d’aide, guides imprimés, matériel marketing; les types de logiciels localisés : logiciels système, logiciels de gestion, logiciels client, logiciels multimédia, logiciels Web.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 558 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 668 Web, technologies, traduction : théories et critiques (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 568.
Ce séminaire examine de façon critique les pratiques contemporaines issues de la mondialisation et du monde numérique affectant les technologies, le Web multilingue et la traduction. Entre autres aspects, sont examinés les enjeux culturels, sociaux, techniques et idéologiques. Le séminaire met l'accent sur la traduction et la communication mondiale.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 568 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 680 Tutorat en littérature (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 681 Tutorial in literature (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 682 Tutorat en traduction (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 683 Tutorial in translation (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 684 Tutorat en linguistique (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 685 Tutorial in linguistics (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 698 Étude d’un sujet particulier / Special Topics (3 crédits)
Ce cours pourra porter sur tout sujet en littérature, traduction ou linguistique qui ne figure pas déjà au programme. Le but du cours est de favoriser une approche pluridisciplinaire et de permettre l’innovation pédagogique.
Autres exigences
FTRA 686 Projet de mémoire (6 crédits)
FTRA 692 Mémoire (24 crédits)
L’étudiante ou l’étudiant pourra choisir d’étudier un sujet particulier en littérature, traduction ou linguistique, sous la forme d’un tutorat. Les tutorats devront être approuvés par le comité d’études supérieures et dépendront des aptitudes et intérêts de l’étudiante et de l’étudiant ainsi que de la disponibilité et des compétences du professeur concerné.
Nota : Les étudiantes et étudiants admis avant 2002-2003 et qui ont préféré rester dans l’ancien programme peuvent suivre FTRA 690 (21 crédits) à condition d’avoir satisfait aux exigences de l’ancien programme.
FTRA 501 Traduction littéraire du français à l’anglais (3 crédits)
ou
FTRA 504 Traduction littéraire de l’anglais au français (3 crédits)
FTRA 532 Initiation à la traduction générale (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 533 Aspects théoriques et pratiques de la terminologie (3 crédits)
FTRA 536 Informatique et traduction (3 crédits)
FTRA 500 Méthodologie générale de la recherche en traduction (3 crédits)
ou
FTRA 539 Courants contemporains en traductologie (3 crédits)
ou
FTRA 540 Lecture critique de traductions (3 crédits)
ou
FTRA 549 Sociologie de la traduction littéraire (3 crédits)
FTRA 529 Révision et correction en traduction (A) (3 crédits)
ou
FTRA 530 Révision et correction en traduction (F) (3 crédits)
Cours en option (15 crédits)
15 crédits choisis parmi les cours suivants :
FRAA 523 Rédaction II (3 crédits)
FTRA 513 Traduction scientifique et technique du français à l’anglais (3 crédits)
FTRA 514 Traduction scientifique et technique de l’anglais au français (3 crédits)
FTRA 515 Traduction commerciale et juridique du français à l’anglais (3 crédits)
FTRA 516 Traduction commerciale et juridique de l’anglais au français(3 crédits)
FTRA 517 Stage de formation du français à l’anglais I (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 519 Stage de formation du français à l’anglais II (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 520 Stage de formation (F) (6 crédits)
FTRA 521 Stage de formation (A) (6 crédits)
FTRA 522 Stage de formation de l’anglais au français I (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 526 Stage de formation de l’anglais au français II (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 527 Travaux dirigés (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 528 Travaux dirigés (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 534 Terminologie et mondialisation (3 crédits)
FTRA 538 Initiation au sous-titrage (3 crédits)
FTRA 542 Traduction avancée en sciences humaines et sociales (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 543 Advanced Translation in Social Sciences and the Humanities (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 544 Traduction littéraire avancée (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 545 Advanced Literary Translation (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 547 Traduction économique du français à l’anglais(A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 548 Traduction économique de l’anglais au français (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 552 Traduction assistée par ordinateur (TAO) et post édition (3 crédits)
FTRA 553 Contextes socio-politiques de la traduction (3 crédits)
FTRA 555 Gestion de projets (3 crédits)
FTRA 558 Pratique de la localisation (3 crédits)
FRAA 598 Étude avancée d’un sujet particulier (3 crédits)
FTRA 598 Étude avancée d’un sujet particulier (3 crédits)
Liste des cours
FRAA 523 Rédaction II (3 crédits)
Ce cours vise l’approfondissement des compétences rédactionnelles par l’apprentissage de techniques de recherche documentaire et de synthese textuelle, et par l’écriture de textes combinant ces techniques comme le compte rendu critique, le dossier ou le texte de vulgarisation.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FRAN 503 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 500 Méthodologie générale de la recherche en traduction (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 600.
Ce séminaire examine les principales méthodes et approches appliquées à l’étude de la traduction. Il trace l’émergence de la discipline autonome de la traductologie ainsi que ses liens actuels avec d’autres sciences humaines et sociales. À l’issue du séminaire, l’étudiante ou l’étudiant a une vue d’ensemble de la théorisation en traduction, ce qui lui permet de se spécialiser en connaissance de cause dans un domaine spécifique, en élaborant une problématique particulière cohérente avec les visées du programme et en empruntant les outils de recherche pertinents.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 600 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 501 Traduction littéraire du français à l’anglais (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 635.
Sensibilisation aux problèmes spécifiques à la traduction littéraire. Travaux pratiques : traduction de textes de genres variés (A).
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 635 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 504 Traduction littéraire de l’anglais au français (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 634.
Sensibilisation aux problèmes spécifiques à la traduction littéraire. Travaux pratiques : traduction de textes de genres variés (F).
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 634 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 513 Traduction scientifique et technique du français à l’anglais (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 623.
Initiation aux différents problèmes de la traduction dans les langues de spécialité scientifiques et techniques (français-anglais). Le cours est divisé en deux ou trois parties, chaque partie correspondant à un domaine spécialisé en traduction (A).
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 623 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 514 Traduction scientifique et technique de l’anglais au français (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 624.
Initiation aux différents problèmes de la traduction dans les langues de spécialité scientifiques et techniques (anglais-français). Le cours est divisé en deux ou trois parties, chaque partie correspondant à un domaine spécialisé en traduction (F).
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 624 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 515 Traduction commerciale et juridique du français à l’anglais (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 625.
Initiation aux différents problèmes de la traduction dans les langues de spécialité de l’administration, du commerce et du droit (français-anglais). Le cours est divisé en parties, chaque partie correspondant à un domaine spécialisé en traduction (A).
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 625 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 516 Traduction commerciale et juridique de l’anglais au français (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 626.
Initiation aux différents problèmes de la traduction dans les langues de spécialité de l’administration, du commerce et du droit (anglais-français). Le cours est divisé en parties, chaque partie correspondant à un domaine spécialisé (F).
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 626 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 517 Stage de formation du français à l’anglais I (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 519 Stage de formation du français à l’anglais II (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 520 Stage de formation (F) (6 crédits)
FTRA 521 Stage de formation (A) (6 crédits)
FTRA 522 Stage de formation de l’anglais au français I (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 526 Stage de formation de l’anglais au français II (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 527 Travaux dirigés (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 528 Travaux dirigés (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 529 Révision et correction en traduction (A) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 629.
Ce cours aborde les différentes méthodes de révision et de correction de textes rédigés ou traduits en anglais; il sensibilise les étudiantes et étudiants aux aspects humains et techniques du métier de réviseure et de réviseur; on touche aussi aux problèmes de l’évaluation de la qualité des traductions (A).
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 629 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 530 Révision et correction en traduction (F) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 630.
Ce cours aborde les différentes méthodes de révision et de correction de textes rédigés ou traduits en français; il sensibilise les étudiantes et étudiants aux aspects humains et techniques du métier de réviseure et de réviseur; on touche aussi aux problèmes de l’évaluation de la qualité des traductions (F).
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 630 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 531 Initiation à la traduction générale (A) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 631.
Ce cours vise à initier les étudiantes et étudiants aux outils notionnels et linguistiques nécessaires pour traduire efficacement des textes d’ordre général. Il leur présente aussi les étapes du processus de la traduction et les familiarise avec les outils de travail de la traduction.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 631 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 532 Initiation à la traduction générale (F) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 632.
Ce cours vise à initier les étudiantes et étudiants aux outils notionnels et linguistiques nécessaires pour traduire efficacement des textes d’ordre général. Il leur présente aussi les étapes du processus de la traduction et les familiarise avec les outils de travail de la traduction.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 632 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 533 Aspects théoriques et pratiques de la terminologie (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 633.
Principes généraux de la terminologie; distinction entre langue générale et langues de spécialité; rapport entre documentation et terminologie; analyse terminologique; terminologie de traduction; supports terminographiques traditionnels et/ou informatisés; terminologie et aménagement linguistique.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 633 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 534 Terminologie et mondialisation (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 611.
Préalable : FTRA 533 ou l’équivalent.
Ce cours porte sur certains points fins en terminologie et en terminographie modernes : synonymie, marques sociolinguistiques, néonymie, normalisation et internationalisation. Il traite spécifiquement du rôle de la terminologie dans la gestion de l’information unilingue et multilingue dans les entreprises et dans les organismes nationaux et internationaux. L’aspect pratique prend, entre autres, la forme de rédaction de rapports de recherche et l’utilisation d’outils terminotiques.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 611 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 536 Informatique et traduction (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 636.
Ce cours porte sur la langue de l’informatique, la théorie et les concepts fondamentaux qui s’y rapportent. Il comporte des exercices de traduction et une initiation aux outils informatisés pour les traducteurs : Internet, bases de données, systèmes de traduction assistée, utilitaires. (F/A)
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 636 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 538 Initiation au sous-titrage (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 638.
Ce cours a pour but d’initier les étudiantes et étudiants à la traduction audiovisuelle, en particulier au sous-titrage. Il comporte un volet théorique, avec lectures et analyses, ainsi qu’un volet pratique où sont traités les principes et les conventions du sous-titrage, les aspects techniques et les genres cinématographiques. Sont aussi abordées la traduction de la voix hors-champ et les techniques d’accessibilité tels le sous-titrage pour malentendants et l’audiodescription.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 638 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 539 Courants contemporains en traductologie (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 601.
Ce séminaire aborde les tendances qui marquent l’actualité de la recherche en traductologie. Sont explorées les nouvelles pratiques de la traduction et l’évolution des cadres conceptuels qui permettent de penser le transfert linguistique et culturel.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 601 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 540 Lecture critique de traductions (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 610.
Ce séminaire propose une étude critique des traductions de l’anglais au français et du français à l’anglais effectuées à travers l’histoire, en tenant compte de la diversité des visées esthétiques, des différentes stratégies de traduction, ainsi que des contraintes socio-politiques ou institutionnelles. L’accent est mis sur l’étude des « grandes traductions » dans les cultures d’expression anglaise et française.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 610 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 542 Traduction avancée en sciences humaines et sociales (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 543 Advanced Translation in Social Sciences and the Humanities (A) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 612 ou FTRA 613.
Ce séminaire pratique et théorique aborde plusieurs domaines des sciences humaines et sociales, notamment la sociologie, la psychanalyse, la théorie féministe. L’étudiante ou l’étudiant produit un commentaire analytique sur ses choix de traduction en s’efforçant de théoriser sa pratique de traducteur-traductrice. Le séminaire FTRA 542 a l’anglais comme langue de départ et le français comme langue d’arrivée (F); le séminaire FTRA 543 a le français comme langue de départ et l’anglais comme langue d’arrivée (A).
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 612 ou FTRA 613 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 544 Traduction littéraire avancée (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 545 Advanced Literary Translation (A) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 614 ou FTRA 615.
Ce séminaire pratique et théorique analyse, à partir de théories littéraires, contemporaines, un échantillon de textes à traduire. L’étudiante ou l’étudiant produit un commentaire analytique sur ses choix de traduction en s’efforçant de théoriser sa pratique de traducteur-traductrice. Le séminaire FTRA 544 a l’anglais comme langue de départ et le français comme langue d’arrivée (F); le séminaire FTRA 545 a le français comme langue de départ et l’anglais comme langue d’arrivée. (A)
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 614 ou FTRA 615 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 547 Traduction économique du français à l’anglais (A) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 647.
Sensibilisation aux problèmes que pose dans le domaine de l’économie la traduction du français à l’anglais. (A)
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 647 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 548 Traduction économique de l’anglais au français (F) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 648.
Sensibilisation aux problèmes que pose dans le domaine de l’économie la traduction de l’anglais au français. (F)
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 648 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 549 Sociologie de la traduction littéraire (3 crédits)
Ce séminaire applique la méthode sociologique à la traduction des genres et des discours de la littérature. Peuvent être étudiés des corpus divers (roman, poésie, théâtre, par exemple) traduits de l’anglais en français et du français en anglais. Seront examinées, par exemple, les théories de Pierre Bourdieu, de Niklas Luhmann ou de Bruno Latour. Le séminaire est l’occasion d’une remise en question des notions de source et de cible en traduction.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 541, FTRA 611 ou FTRA 619 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 552 Traduction assistée par ordinateur (TAO) et post édition (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 652.
Préalable : FTRA 536 pour le diplôme en traduction.
Ce cours permet d’analyser les aspects morphologiques, lexicaux, syntaxiques et sémantiques des systèmes de traduction automatisée. L’étudiante et l’étudiant apprennent à appliquer les concepts analysés à un système commercialisé. Ils font des exercices simples de programmation portant sur des problèmes linguistiques; ils utilisent des outils de gestion et de traduction pour le matériel à localiser à l’aide de logiciels de localisation, de logiciels de terminologie et de mémoires de traduction. Ils évaluent et apprennent à réviser les sorties d'un système de traduction automatique, tout en mettant l'accent sur le contrôle de la qualité.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 652 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 553 Contextes socio-politiques de la traduction (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 603.
Ce séminaire examine les situations sociales et politiques qui influent sur le travail pratique des traducteurs et la réception des traductions. Sont étudiés, par exemple, le cas des États bilingues ou multilingues, l'évolution des politiques linguistiques et leurs répercussions sur la traduction, les rapports entre les langues majoritaires et minoritaires, les effets de la migration sur les sociétés de plus en plus hybrides et les marchés nouveaux de la traduction.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 550 ou FTRA 603 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 555 Gestion de projets (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 655.
Ce cours traite de la gestion des projets de traduction/localisation multilingues, depuis la création de l’offre de services, jusqu’au contrôle de la qualité et de la livraison, en passant par la résolution de problèmes et la gestion en situation de crise. Il comprend une partie théorique et des mises en situation. Les étudiantes et étudiants se familiarisent avec l’évaluation des ressources (humaines et matérielles) nécessaires pour exécuter le travail, l’élaboration d’échéanciers et le suivi du budget. Ils apprennent à gérer les ressources affectées aux projets afin de pouvoir respecter le mandat qui leur est confié.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 655 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 558 Pratique de la localisation (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 658.
L’étudiante et l’étudiant apprennent dans ce cours les stratégies de localisation et les processus de localisation; la localisation de logiciels et la localisation de sites Web; les acteurs dans les projets de localisation; la situation et le travail du traducteur dans les projets de localisation; les types de fichiers à localiser : ressources, code source, fichiers d’aide, guides imprimés, matériel marketing; les types de logiciels localisés : logiciels système, logiciels de gestion, logiciels clients, logiciels multimédia, logiciels Web.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 658 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 559 Stage en gestion de projet (6 crédits)
FTRA 560 Stage en gestion de projet I (3 crédits)
FTRA 561 Stage en gestion de projet II (3 crédits)
FRAA 598 Étude avancée d’un sujet particulier (3 crédits)
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi un sujet particulier en FRAN 598 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour le même sujet en FRAA 598.
FTRA 598 Étude avancée d’un sujet particulier (3 crédits)
FRAA 500 Didactique du français langue étrangère et seconde (3 crédits)
Ce séminaire vise à présenter les principaux courants en didactique du français langue étrangère et seconde et leurs fondements théoriques. En se basant sur les théories de l’apprentissage, les étudiants analysent en profondeur chacun des principaux courants didactiques en apprenant à discerner ce qui les différencie, les rapproche ou les oppose. Ce séminaire leur offre les outils nécessaires pour faire un choix didactique éclairé en fonction de l'apprentissage visé. Ils y ont l’occasion d’animer un atelier de conversation auprès d’apprenants allophones pour pouvoir faire des liens entre leurs nouveaux acquis et la réalité de l’enseignement-apprentissage, et ce, sous la supervision d’un professeur.
FRAA 501 Théories linguistiques pour l'apprentissage et l’enseignement des langues (3 crédits)
Ce séminaire amène les étudiants à faire le lien entre les théories linguistiques et les applications à l’enseignement et à l’apprentissage du français langue seconde. Il permet aux étudiants de jeter un regard critique sur les principaux courants en linguistique appliquée à l’enseignement des langues et de se sensibiliser à des questions fondamentales qui se posent du point de vue de l’enseignant et de l’apprenant respectivement.
FRAA 502 Technologies de l'information et de la communication (TIC) et enseignement du FLS (3 crédits)
Ce séminaire vise à transmettre aux étudiants l'ensemble des compétences nécessaires à la réalisation de ressources interactives tirant pleinement profit des potentialités offertes par les TIC (apprentissage collaboratif, multimédia, parcours d'apprentissage personnalisés, etc.). Au moyen de la conception de matériel pédagogique en ligne (exerciciels, plateformes de formation ouverte et à distance), les étudiants voient comment optimiser l'apport des TIC à l'acquisition de la langue cible ou à l'évaluation des acquis; intégrer les fondements théoriques et pratiques acquis dans les autres séminaires et répondre pleinement aux besoins des apprenants (que ces besoins soient formatifs ou sommatifs) tout en évitant les écueils didactiques ou techniques que la réalisation de ce type de ressources peut comporter.
FRAA 510 Stage d'observation (3 crédits)
Ce cours permet aux étudiants de réaliser leur stage d'observation en enseignement du français langue seconde dans le cadre d'un cours universitaire. Au cours de ce stage, les étudiants analysent les moyens pédagogiques utilisés au niveau universitaire. Les stagiaires observent les activités d'enseignement, l'organisation et la prise en charge de la classe et ils font un retour critique sur leur expérience pratique à partir des observations faites dans le milieu de stage.
FRAA 522 Questions actuelles en linguistique française (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FRAA 422
Ce cours propose l’étude d’un sujet particulier du domaine de la linguistique. Plus précisément, ce cours aborde des questions qui peuvent être rattachées au domaine de l’énonciation, de la sociolinguistique, des politiques linguistiques, du traitement automatique du langage ou d’autres domaines de recherche en linguistique. Des présentations théoriques, des ateliers d’observation ou des exercices d’application permettent aux étudiants de mieux cerner la problématique abordée.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FRAA 422 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 536 Informatique et traduction (3 crédits)
FTRA 552 Traduction assistée par ordinateur (TAO) et post édition (3 crédits)
FTRA 558 Pratique de la localisation (3 crédits)
FTRA 568 Web, technologies, traduction : théories et critiques
Cours en option (3 crédits)
FRAA 532 Écriture pour le web (3 crédits)
FTRA 538 Initiation au sous-titrage (offert aux deux ans) (3 crédits)
FTRA 555 Gestion de projets (3 crédits)
FTRA 556 Programmation en localisation (offert aux deux ans) (3 crédits)
FTRA 598 Étude avancée d’un sujet particulier / Special Topics (3 crédits)
Liste des cours
FRAA 532 Écriture pour le Web (3 crédits)
Préalable : Autorisation de la direction du certificat.
Ce cours vise à familiariser l’étudiante ou l’étudiant aux techniques d’écriture pour le Web et aux technologies associées à ce média. Il permettra de mieux comprendre ce que l’hypertexte et l’écrit sur support numérique impliquent du point de vue du traitement de l’information et des spécificités linguistiques et ergonomiques. Il vise à initier l’étudiante et l’étudiant à la création et à la traduction de pages et de sites Web.
FTRA 531 Initiation à la traduction générale (A) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 631.
Ce cours vise à initier les étudiantes et étudiants aux outils notionnels et linguistiques nécessaires pour traduire efficacement des textes d’ordre général. Il leur présente aussi les étapes du processus de la traduction et les familiarise avec les outils de travail de la traduction.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 631 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 532 Initiation à la traduction générale (F) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 632.
Ce cours vise à initier les étudiantes et étudiants aux outils notionnels et linguistiques nécessaires pour traduire efficacement des textes d’ordre général. Il leur présente aussi les étapes du processus de la traduction et les familiarise avec les outils de travail de la traduction.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 632 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 536 Informatique et traduction (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 636.
Ce cours porte sur la langue de l’informatique, la théorie et les concepts fondamentaux qui s’y rapportent. Il comporte des exercices de traduction et une initiation aux outils informatisés pour les traducteurs : Internet, bases de données, systèmes de traduction assistée, utilitaires. (F/A)
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 636 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 538 Initiation au sous-titrage (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 638.
Ce cours a pour but d’initier les étudiantes et étudiants à la traduction audiovisuelle, en
particulier au sous-titrage. Il comporte un volet théorique, avec lectures et analyses, ainsi
qu’un volet pratique où sont traités les principes et les conventions du sous-titrage, les
aspects techniques et les genres cinématographiques. Sont aussi abordées la traduction
de la voix hors-champ et les techniques d’accessibilité tels le sous-titrage pour
malentendants et l’audiodescription.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 638 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 552 Traduction assistée par ordinateur (TAO) et post édition (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 652.
Préalable : FTRA 536 pour le diplôme en traduction.
Ce cours permet d’analyser les aspects morphologiques, lexicaux, syntaxiques et sémantiques des systèmes de traduction automatisée. L’étudiante et l’étudiant apprennent à appliquer les concepts analysés à un système commercialisé. Ils font des exercices simples de programmation portant sur des problèmes linguistiques; ils utilisent des outils de gestion et de traduction pour le matériel à localiser à l’aide de logiciels de localisation, de logiciels de terminologie et de mémoires de traduction. Ils évaluent et apprennent à réviser les sorties d'un système de traduction automatique, tout en mettant l'accent sur le contrôle de la qualité.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 652 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 555 Gestion de projets (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 655.
Ce cours traite de la gestion des projets de traduction/localisation multilingues, depuis la création de l’offre de services, jusqu’au contrôle de la qualité et de la livraison, en passant par la résolution de problèmes et la gestion en situation de crise. Il comprend une partie théorique et des mises en situation. Les étudiantes et étudiants se familiarisent avec l’évaluation des ressources (humaines et matérielles) nécessaires pour exécuter le travail, l’élaboration d’échéanciers et le suivi du budget. Ils apprennent à gérer les ressources affectées aux projets afin de pouvoir respecter le mandat qui leur est confié.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 655 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 556 Programmation en localisation (3 crédits)
Préalable : FTRA 552 ou FTRA 558.
L’étudiante et l’étudiant se familiarisent dans ce cours avec l’environnement informatique : ils se familiarisent avec l’intégration et le partage des ressources d’un (et avec un) logiciel (d’une page Internet) et avec les restrictions liées au système d’exploitation; ils ont un aperçu du fonctionnement d’un logiciel (rédaction, compilation, exécution), d’un programme informatique : variables, données, contrôle; d’un langage de programmation : structure, manipulation des chaînes d’entrée et de sortie, du code « source » d’un programme informatique (ou site Internet) à localiser, des chaînes (des messages) à traduire.
FTRA 558 Pratique de la localisation (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 658.
L’étudiante et l’étudiant apprennent dans ce cours les stratégies de localisation et les processus de localisation : la localisation de logiciels et la localisation de sites Web; les acteurs dans les projets de localisation; la situation et le travail du traducteur dans les projets de localisation; les types de fichiers à localiser : ressources, code source, fichiers d’aide, guides imprimés, matériel marketing; les types de logiciels localisés : logiciels système, logiciels de gestion, logiciels clients, logiciels multimédia, logiciels Web.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 658 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 568 Web, technologies, traduction : théories et critiques (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 668.
Ce séminaire examine de façon critique les pratiques contemporaines issues de la mondialisation et du monde numérique affectant les technologies, le Web multilingue et la traduction. Entre autres aspects, sont examinés les enjeux culturels, sociaux, techniques et idéologiques. Le séminaire met l'accent sur la traduction et la communication mondiale.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 668 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 598 Étude avancée d’un sujet particulier / Special Topics (3 crédits)
HENV 801 Pedagogical Training (3 credits)
The objective of this course is to ensure that all PhD students acquire strong teaching and other communication skills which are useful for both academic and non-academic positions. Candidates are required to attend a seminar in university teaching in collaboration with the Centre for Teaching and Learning Services of Concordia University. Following the successful completion of this seminar, candidates are required to give four lectures (normally 75 minutes each) to undergraduate classes. The course is graded on a pass/fail basis.
HENV 802 Experiential Learning (3 credits)
The objective of this course is to ensure that all students acquire some practical experience in their field of research. Candidates are required to work for a minimum of 200 hours (either full-time or part-time) in either the private sector in a field relevant to their doctoral research, in a research laboratory based outside Concordia University, in a non-profit organization or in the government. The course is graded on a pass/fail basis.
HENV 805 Research Proposal Seminar (3 credits)
Conceptual and methodological frameworks related to human interventions in the environment in the built, social and natural environment are examined through various student presentations and exchanges on their research topic. This course includes completion of the oral presentation of the research proposal.
HENV 810 Thesis Proposal (3 credits)
Students are required to select their research topic and formulate a thesis proposal under the supervision of a thesis supervisor and with input from a supervisory committee. The written proposal includes a sound rationale for the proposed research, a detailed description of the research design and methodology, and a comprehensive literature review. The thesis proposal is assessed by the supervisory committee and approved by the Graduate Program Director.
HENV 885 Comprehensive Exam (6 credits)
The comprehensive exam is prepared in consultation with the supervisory committee and aims to ensure that the student has a sound knowledge of three areas of concentration within his or her field of research. The examining committee consists of the supervisory committee plus one additional member of the Department of Geography, Planning and Environment and is chaired by the Graduate Program Director. The student is evaluated on the quality of the written and oral responses to questions.
HENV 895 Research and Thesis (66 credits)
A major portion of the doctoral program involves the planning and execution of innovative and original research under the direction of a supervisor or two co-supervisors. The thesis is examined by a Thesis Examining Committee and is defended orally.
Elective Courses
HENV 605 Advanced Qualitative Research Methods (3 credits)
This course considers some of the foundational theories that inform contemporary research in the fields of Human Geography and Urban Studies. It also explores a spectrum of qualitative research paradigms, theories and advanced methodologies relevant to social science. of qualitative research paradigms, theories and methodologies relevant to social science.
HENV 610 Advanced Quantitative Research Methods (3 credits)
This course considers experimental design and advanced data analysis methods in Geography and Environmental Sciences. The course focuses on statistical analysis of quantitative data, using the R programming environment. Specific topics include data exploration and plotting,advanced statistical tests, linear regression, statistical model selection, non-parametric tests and mixed effects models.
HENV 620 Sustainable Transportation (3 credits)
This advanced seminar explores the different elements of what is broadly known as sustainable transportation. It considers the importance as well as the negative impacts of transport systems, and how these are described and captured methodologically. Of critical importance is the intimate link between land-use and transportation systems.
HENV 625 Sustainable Resource Management (3 credits)
This seminar examines the impact of human activities on natural resources. Topics such as integrated management and exploitation practices, biodiversity and conservation, focusing particularly on forest and water resources from physical, chemical, biological, socio-economic, and technological perspectives are investigated.
HENV 630 Theories of Society and Space (3 credits)
Human Geography is informed by a range of theories that have developed inside and outside the discipline. This course introduces students to some of the most influential of these theories as well as to theoretically-informed geographical literature. While students are exposed to foundational theories, the course focuses on critical geographical work that seeks to interpret the present moment.
HENV 635 Spatial Analysis (3 credits)
This course examines analytical methods for handling specifically spatial data, where the arrangement of observations in space is thought to be of significance. The emphasis is on the choice and application of appropriate methods for the analysis of various types of data that are encountered in Geography, Planning, and Environmental Studies. Procedures for analyzing spatial distributions of phenomena, temporal dynamics and change are examined in relation to Geographical Information Systems (GIS) tools and statistical techniques.
HENV 640 (Re)shaping the City (3 credits)
By relying on an array of theoretical formulations informed by political economy, economic geography, urban morphology, urban sociology, anthropology and ecology, this seminar explores various social processes that contribute to the shaping and reshaping of our cities’ material and spatial forms.
HENV 645 Behaviour and the Urban Environment (3 credits)
This course provides a basic understanding of the relationship between people and the urban environment. The focus is on the collective and individual responses of people to the built or designed environment, and the way in which these responses can be used to guide projects, plans and policies. The basic studies for the location of commercial facilities and the modelling of human spatial behaviour are introduced.
HENV 650 The Political-Economy of the City (3 credits)
This course explores the implications of economic globalization and neoliberalism for urban life in late capitalist (post-1970s) period. Drawing on literatures from the fields of planning, geography, and political economy, it focuses on how urban policies and services are being restructured and how these changes affect different social groups.
HENV 655 Environmental Modelling (3 credits)
The different approaches to modelling the bio-physical, built or human environment are examined. The conceptualization of simple models to examine how human interventions affect the environment is investigated. Different modelling approaches such as system models, computer visualization and simulation are covered. Students develop a model scheme related to their thesis topic. Lectures and laboratory.
HENV 660 Climate Change and Sustainability (3 credits)
This seminar examines the interface between climate science, and the demands and challenges of developing sustainable human societies. Class discussions are oriented around current literature on topics such as the potential impacts of climate change on vulnerable communities, strategies to enhance resilience and increase global equity in climate mitigation efforts, and opportunities to develop sustainable energy systems. The course also includes quantitative analysis and visualization of spatial change datasets.
HENV 665 Special Topics Seminar (3 credits)
This course is designed to meet the special needs of individual graduate students. Topics vary to permit investigation of current and developing theories and research areas. Content involves presentation, discussion, and critical analysis of information from relevant scientific literature. The course will also take advantage of visiting expertise.
HENV 670 Environmental Governance (3 credits)
This course examines the principles, practices and institutions involved in environmental conservation and management as well as the sustainable exploitation of natural resources. Topics include sustainability, the precautionary principle, social capital, adaptive capacity, common property resource theories, deliberative democracy, environmental justice and environmental conflict resolution. Attention is given to issues of scale, particularly the mismatch of spatial, temporal and functional scales that characterize unsustainable management and use practices.
HENV 675 Community-Based Conservation (3 credits)
This course addresses the question of community participation in conservation and development initiatives. Focusing on the particular experience of local communities, it presents participatory concepts, principles, tools, and processes that have practical application to a broad range of contexts and settings.
Note: Students who have received credit for GEOG 607 may not take this course for credit.
HENV 680 Advanced Seminar in Environmental Science (3 credits)
This course provides an overview of current research in environmental and related scientific disciplines. The course involves seminars, presentations, and critical analysis of scientific literature, including discussion of cutting-edge research topics in fields such as ecological restoration, biodiversity, climate change, renewable energy, food and water security, and natural resource conservation.
HENV 690 Seminar in Social and Cultural Geography (3 credits)
This seminar introduces students to some important contemporary geographical approaches and topics in the study of society and culture. Specific themes may include globalization, migration, multiculturalism and diaspora, marginality, policing and imprisonment, and social movements. To provide a broad understanding of these themes, the course emphasizes analyses that draw upon geographical concepts of space, place, identity, and power.
ENVS 601 EA: Concepts, Principles and Practice (6 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
This course aims to provide students with theoretical and practical knowledge related to environmental assessment and its role in project planning and policy development. The evolution of environmental assessment (EA), its current practices and functions, and future directions arediscussed. The roles and components of EA and EA procedures in Canada (at both the federal and provincial levels) are emphasized. Guest speakers, regular readings and in-class discussions supplement the lectures.
ENVS 608 Getting Ready for the EA Internship (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
Students gain an understanding of the internship process and acquire information necessary to prepare for the work involved in securing an internship. Workshops on professional development help students prepare for and secure internship placements, and enhance their report writing and oral presentation skills. The course includes four workshops: 1) Internship requirement and timeline, 2) Resumé writing and interview techniques, 3) Writing of final report and preparation for oral presentation, and 4) Basic concepts of project management. Students are required to assess the written internship reports and oral presentations of their peers. The course is graded on a pass/fail basis.
ENVS 652 Data Collection and Analysis for EA (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
This course focuses on methods and issues in data collection and analysis appropriate for impact prediction in the abiotic, biotic and built environment, including air, surface and ground water, soil, landscape, biodiversity, noise, cultural and socio-economic conditions.
Note: Students who have received credit for ENVS 662 may not take this course for credit.
ENVS 653 Geographical Information Systems for EA (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
This course examines the use of Geographical Information Systems (GIS) in Environmental  Assessment (EA), particularly focusing on the role of GIS in the analysis of environmental data and in decision-making processes. Topics covered include data acquisition, multi-criteria decision analysis, fuzzy sets and interpolation techniques. The course comprises lectures, lab exercises and case study analysis. The instruction is built around a series of practical exercises mainly using industry-standard GIS software. The objective of the course is to provide a sound theoretical and practical background in the use of geospatial technologies for EA applications.
Note: Students who have received credit for ENVS 663 may not take this course for credit.
ENVS 664 Field Course in EA (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
The goal of this course is to expose students to practical issues related to Environmental Assessment (EA). The course comprises: (1) in-class preparation meetings followed by (2) a one-week in-field experience. During this week, students meet practitioners and individuals from local communities, industries and/or governments involved in EA. Through these interactions, students are exposed to a diverse range of perspectives and experiences related to EA. The course is validated through an assessment of the knowledge acquired during the trip. Students are responsible for the cost of food, accommodation and transportation associated with the one-week field trip (cost varies depending on destination).
Note: Students who have received credit for ENVS 662 may not take this course for credit.
ENVS 668 Indigenous Peoples and Environmental Assessment (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
Development projects are often located on or adjacent to Indigenous territories with significant impacts on their lands, lives and cultures. As such, Indigenous peoples require unique consideration within EA frameworks which should respect Indigenous and treaty rights, including international commitments (e.g. UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples) and court rulings related to: (1) Free, Prior, and Informed Consent (FPIC) for development proposed on Indigenous lands; and (2) the inclusion of Indigenous knowledge and perspectives in decision-making. This seminar course surveys recent developments in these areas and explores the potential of EA to contribute to reconciliation between Indigenous and non-Indigenous peoples in Canada (and elsewhere).
Elective Courses
BIOL 618 Ecology for Environmentalists (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
This course discusses the principles of the ecology of individuals, populations, communities and ecosystems and the effects of environmental disturbances ranging from immediate pollution to long-term climate change.
Note 1: Students who have received credit for BIOL 508 may not take this course for credit.
Note 2: Students registered in a graduate program in Biology may not take this course for credit.
ECON 659 Economics for Environmentalists (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
This course considers one of the most serious problems facing our global civilization: the on-going conflict between economic activity and the bio-physical world upon which all human activity ultimately depends. The course explains the basic theoretical framework most economists use to describe economic activities and the relationship between these activities and the natural world. Understanding the logical apparatus of economics theory shows why market forces and environmental integrity are often in conflict and why economic arguments dominate environmental policy debates at both national and international levels.
Note 1: Students who have received credit for ECON 559 may not take this course for credit.
Note 2: Students registered in programs in Economics, or programs in the John Molson School of Business, may not take this course for credit.
ENVS 604 Environmental Law and Policy (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Programme Director.
This course introduces students to environmental law and policy at the international, North American and regional levels with an emphasis on Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) as a tool for promoting environmentally sound and sustainable development. The course provides an overview of issues such as environmental security, Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA), banking and environmental finance, access to justice in environmental decision making, climate change, biodiversity, and green growth. The role of international organizations and Multilateral Environmental Agreements (MEAs) is given particular attention.
ENVS 605 Environmental Standards (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
This course provides an overview of the International Standards Organization (ISO) standards and guidelines for industry to implement a sound Environmental Management System (EMS). These guidelines are outlined in a series of publications designated as ISO 14000. Topics covered will include: the evolution and benefits of EMS, the ISO 14001 principles, integration between ISO 9001 and 14001, the registration process, auditing an EMS, life cycle assessment, and environmental labelling. Upon successful completion of the course, students are encouraged to pursue formal accreditation.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under an ENVS 505 number may not take this course for credit.
ENVS 620 Advanced Topics in Environmental Assessment (3 credits)
This course focuses on selected topics within the discipline. Topics vary to permit investigation of current and developing theories and research areas.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. ENVS 620A, ENVS 620B, etc.
GEOG 607 Indigenous Peoples and the Environment (3 credits)
This course provides an extended, in-depth exploration of the relationships and roles of Indigenous peoples with respect to their traditional territories and natural resources. Indigenous ontologies and epistemologies are highlighted in addition to Indigenous aspirations and approaches for use and stewardship of the environment. The course examines theoretical and case-study literature, with a broad regional focus on Aboriginal peoples in Canada while also drawing from comparative international experiences of Indigenous peoples.
GEOG 620 Special Topics in Geography (3 credits)
This course focuses on selected topics within the discipline. Topics vary to permit investigation of current and developing theories and research areas.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. GEOG 620A, GEOG 620B, etc.
HENV 610 Advanced Quantitative Research Methods (3 credits)
This course considers experimental design and advanced data analysis methods in Geography and Environmental Sciences. The course focuses on statistical analysis of quantitative data, using the R programming environment. Specific topics include data exploration and plotting, advanced statistical tests, linear regression, statistical model selection, non-parametric tests and mixed effects models.
HENV 625 Sustainable Resource Management (3 credits)
This seminar examines the impact of human activities on natural resources. Topics such as integrated management and exploitation practices, biodiversity and conservation, focusing particularly on forest and water resources from physical, chemical, biological, socio-economic, and technological perspectives are investigated.
HENV 660 Climate Change and Sustainability (3 credits)
This seminar examines the interface between climate science, and the demands and challenges of developing sustainable human societies. Class discussions are oriented around current literature on topics such as the potential impacts of climate change on vulnerable communities, strategies to enhance resilience and increase global equity in climate mitigation efforts, and opportunities to develop sustainable energy systems. The course also includes quantitative analysis and visualization of spatial change datasets.
HENV 655 Environmental Modelling (3 credits)
The different approaches to modelling the bio-physical, built or human environment are examined. The conceptualization of simple models to examine how human interventions affect the environment is investigated. Different modelling approaches such as system models, computer visualization and simulation are covered. Students develop a model scheme related to their thesis topic. Lectures and laboratory.
HENV 670 Environmental Governance (3 credits)
This course examines the principles, practices and institutions involved in environmental conservation and management as well as the sustainable exploitation of natural resources. Topics include sustainability, the precautionary principle, social capital, adaptive capacity, common property resource theories, deliberative democracy, environmental justice and environmental conflict resolution. Attention is given to issues of scale, particularly the mismatch of spatial, temporal and functional scales that characterize unsustainable management and use practices.
HENV 675 Community-Based Conservation (3 credits)
This course addresses the question of community participation in conservation and development initiatives. Focusing on the particular experience of local communities, it presents participatory concepts, principles, tools, and processes that have practical application to a broad range of contexts and settings.
Note: Students who have received credit for GEOG 607 may not take this course for credit.
HENV 680 Advanced Seminar in Environmental Science (3 credits)
This course provides an overview of current research in environmental and related scientific disciplines. The course involves seminars, presentations, and critical analysis of scientific literature, including discussion of cutting-edge research topics in fields such as ecological restoration, biodiversity, climate change, renewable energy, food and water security, and natural resource conservation.
Internship and Report
ENVS 696 Internship and Report in EA (18 credits)
Prerequisite: Completion of all course work (27 credits), a minimum GPA of 3.30 and permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
This internship is a 4-month placement in industry, government, and non-government where EA work is being undertaken. It is intended to maximize the educational experience and bridge the gap between what employers consider necessary job skills and what the university considers essential knowledge. Students prepare an internship report and present it orally.
Note: Students are assisted in their efforts to obtain a relevant placement by the Internship Coordinator. Placements must be approved by the EA Graduate Program Director.
HENV 605 Advanced Qualitative Research Methods (3 credits)
This course considers some of the foundational theories that inform contemporary research in the fields of Human Geography and Urban Studies. It also explores a spectrum of qualitative research paradigms, theories and advanced methodologies relevant to social science. of qualitative research paradigms, theories and methodologies relevant to social science.
HENV 610 Advanced Quantitative Research Methods (3 credits)
This course considers experimental design and advanced data analysis methods in Geography and Environmental Sciences. The course focuses on statistical analysis of quantitative data, using the R programming environment. Specific topics include data exploration and plotting, advanced statistical tests, linear regression, statistical model selection, non-parametric tests and mixed effects models.
HENV 615 Research Proposal Seminar (3 credits)
This seminar provides an opportunity to extend, deepen, and apply the conceptual and methodological frameworks presented in the core and elective courses, through a combination of classroom discussions and attendance at departmental research seminars. Students are taught research and presentation skills and are guided through the process of preparing their thesis research proposal. Students need to submit a written research proposal to their thesis research supervisor(s) as a requirement for this course.
HENV 685 Thesis Proposal (3 credits)
Students are required to select their research topic and formulate a research proposal under the supervision of a thesis supervisor and with input from a thesis committee. The written proposal will include a sound rationale for the proposed research, a detailed description of the research design and methodology, and a comprehensive literature review. Students are also required to present an oral presentation of their proposal to the Department. The thesis proposal must be formally approved by the thesis committee and the Graduate Program Director before research activities can begin. The thesis proposal should be completed before the end of the second semester of residency in the Program and after a minimum of 6 credits in the Program have been taken.
HENV 695 Thesis (30 credits)
Students are required to demonstrate their ability to carry out original, independent research. The thesis, which will be researched and written under the direction of a supervisor and thesis committee, should normally not exceed 100 pages. Upon completion of the thesis, the student will be required to defend his/her thesis before an external examiner and his/her thesis committee.
Elective Courses
GEOG 620 Special Topics in Geography (3 credits)
This course focuses on selected topics within the discipline. Topics vary to permit investigation of current and developing theories and research areas.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. GEOG 620A, GEOG 620B, etc.
GEOG 625 Directed Studies (3 credits)
With written permission of the graduate program director, a student studies a particular field or topic relating to geography, urban or environment studies. A detailed outline of the proposed study, approved by a study supervisor is required.
HENV 620 Sustainable Transportation (3 credits)
This advanced seminar explores the different elements of what is broadly known as sustainable transportation. It considers the importance as well as the negative impacts of transport systems, and how these are described and captured methodologically. Of critical importance is the intimate link between land-use and transportation systems.
HENV 625 Sustainable Resource Management (3 credits)
This seminar examines the impact of human activities on natural resources. Topics such as integrated management and exploitation practices, biodiversity and conservation, focusing particularly on forest and water resources from physical, chemical, biological, socio-economic, and technological perspectives are investigated.
HENV 630 Theories of Society and Space (3 credits)
Human Geography is informed by a range of theories that have developed inside and outside the discipline. This course introduces students to some of the most influential of these theories as well as to theoretically-informed geographical literature. While students are exposed to foundational theories, the course focuses on critical geographical work that seeks to interpret the present moment.
HENV 635 Spatial Analysis (3 credits)
This course examines analytical methods for handling specifically spatial data, where the arrangement of observations in space is thought to be of significance. The emphasis is on the choice and application of appropriate methods for the analysis of various types of data that are encountered in Geography, Planning and Environmental Studies. Procedures for analyzing spatial distributions of phenomena, temporal dynamics and change are examined in relation to Geographical Information Systems (GIS) tools and statistical techniques.
HENV 640 (Re)shaping the City (3 credits)
By relying on an array of theoretical formulations informed by political economy, economic geography, urban morphology, urban sociology, anthropology and ecology, this seminar explores various social processes that contribute to the shaping and reshaping of our cities’ material and spatial forms.
HENV 645 Behaviour and the Urban Environment (3 credits)
This course provides a basic understanding of the relationship between people and the urban environment. The focus is on the collective and individual responses of people to the built or designed environment, and the way in which these responses can be used to guide projects, plans and policies. The basic studies for the location of commercial facilities and the modelling of human spatial behaviour are introduced.
HENV 650 The Political Economy of the City (3 credits)
This course explores the implications of economic globalization and neoliberalism for urban life in late capitalist (post-1970s) period. Drawing on literatures from the fields of planning, geography, and political economy, it focuses on how urban policies and services are being restructured and how these changes affect different social groups.
HENV 655 Environmental Modelling (3 credits)
The different approaches to modelling the bio-physical, built or human environment are examined. The conceptualization of simple models to examine how human interventions affect the environment is investigated. Different modelling approaches such as system models, computer visualization and simulation are covered. Students develop a model scheme related to their thesis topic. Lectures and laboratory.
HENV 660 Climate Change and Sustainability (3 credits)
This seminar examines the interface between climate science, and the demands and challenges of developing sustainable human societies. Class discussions are oriented around current literature on topics such as the potential impacts of climate change on vulnerable communities, strategies to enhance resilience and increase global equity in climate mitigation efforts, and opportunities to develop sustainable energy systems. The course also includes quantitative analysis and visualization of spatial change datasets.
HENV 665 Special Topics Seminar (3 credits)
This course is designed to meet the special needs of individual graduate students. Topics vary to permit investigation of current and developing theories and research areas. Content involves presentation, discussion, and critical analysis of information from relevant scientific literature. The course will also take advantage of visiting expertise.
HENV 670 Environmental Governance (3 credits)
This course examines the principles, practices and institutions involved in environmental conservation and management as well as the sustainable exploitation of natural resources. Topics include sustainability, the precautionary principle, social capital, adaptive capacity, common property resource theories, deliberative democracy, environmental justice and environmental conflict resolution. Attention is given to issues of scale, particularly the mismatch of spatial, temporal and functional scales that characterize unsustainable management and use practices.
HENV 675 Community-Based Conservation (3 credits)
This course addresses the question of community participation in conservation and development initiatives. Focusing on the particular experience of local communities, it presents participatory concepts, principles, tools, and processes that have practical application to a broad range of contexts and settings.
Note: Students who have received credit for GEOG 607 may not take this course for credit.
HENV 680 Advanced Seminar in Environmental Science (3 credits)
This course provides an overview of current research in environmental and related scientific disciplines. The course involves seminars, presentations, and critical analysis of scientific literature, including discussion of cutting-edge research topics in fields such as ecological restoration, biodiversity, climate change, renewable energy, food and water security, and natural resource conservation.
HENV 690 Seminar in Social and Cultural Geography (3 credits)
This seminar introduces students to some important contemporary geographical approaches and topics in the study of society and culture. Specific themes may include globalization, migration, multiculturalism and diaspora, marginality, policing and imprisonment, and social movements. To provide a broad understanding of these themes, the course emphasizes analyses that draw upon geographical concepts of space, place, identity, and power.
ENVS 601 EA: Concepts, Principles and Practice (6 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
This course aims to provide students with theoretical and practical knowledge related to environmental assessment and its role in project planning and policy development. The evolution of environmental assessment (EA), its current practices and functions, and future directions arediscussed. The roles and components of EA and EA procedures in Canada (at both the federal and provincial levels) are emphasized. Guest speakers, regular readings and in-class discussions supplement the lectures.
ENVS 652 Data Collection and Analysis for EA (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
This course focuses on methods and issues in data collection and analysis appropriate for impact prediction in the abiotic, biotic and built environment, including air, surface and ground water, soil, landscape, biodiversity, noise, cultural and socio-economic conditions.
Note: Students who have received credit for ENVS 662 many take this course for credit.
ENVS 653 Geographical Information Systems for EA (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
This course examines the use of Geographical Information Systems (GIS) in Environmental  Assessment (EA), particularly focusing on the role of GIS in the analysis of environmental data and in decision-making processes. Topics covered include data acquisition multi-criteria decision analysis, fuzzy sets and interpolation techniques. The course comprises lectures, lab exercises and case study analysis. The instruction is built around a series of practical exercises mainly using industry-standard GIS software. The objective of the course is to provide a sound theoretical and practical background in the use of geospatial technologies for EA applications.
Note: Students who have received credit for ENVS 663 may not take this course for credit.
ENVS 668 Indigenous Peoples and Environmental Assessment (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
Development projects are often located on or adjacent to Indigenous territories with significant impacts on their lands, lives and cultures. As such, Indigenous peoples require unique consideration within EA frameworks which should respect Indigenous and treaty rights, including international commitments (e.g. UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples) and court rulings related to: (1) Free, Prior, and Informed Consent (FPIC) for development proposed on Indigenous lands; and (2) the inclusion of Indigenous knowledge and perspectives in decision-making. This seminar course surveys recent developments in these areas and explores the potential of EA to contribute to reconciliation between Indigenous and non-Indigenous peoples in Canada (and elsewhere).
Elective Courses
BIOL 618 Ecology for Environmentalists (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
This course discusses the principles of the ecology of individuals, populations, communities and ecosystems and the effects of environmental disturbances ranging from immediate pollution to long-term climate change.
Note 1: Students who have received credit for BIOL 508 may not take this course for credit.
Note 2: Students registered in a graduate program in Biology may not take this course for credit.
ECON 659 Economics for Environmentalists (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
This course considers one of the most serious problems facing our global civilization: the on-going conflict between economic activity and the bio-physical world upon which all human activity ultimately depends. The course explains the basic theoretical framework most economists use to describe economic activities and the relationship between these activities and the natural world. Understanding the logical apparatus of economics theory shows why market forces and environmental integrity are often in conflict and why economic arguments dominate environmental policy debates at both national and international levels.
Note 1: Students who have received credit for ECON 559 may not take this course for credit.
Note 2: Students registered in programs in Economics, or programs in the John Molson School of Business, may not take this course for credit.
ENVS 604 Environmental Law and Policy (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Programme Director.
This course introduces students to environmental law and policy at the international, North American and regional levels with an emphasis on Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) as a tool for promoting environmentally sound and sustainable development. The course provides an overview of issues such as environmental security, Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA), banking and environmental finance, access to justice in environmental decision making, climate change, biodiversity, and green growth. The role of international organizations and Multilateral Environmental Agreements (MEAs) is given particular attention.
ENVS 605 Environmental Standards (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
This course provides an overview of the International Standards Organization (ISO) standards and guidelines for industry to implement a sound Environmental Management System (EMS). These guidelines are outlined in a series of publications designated as ISO 14000. Topics covered will include: the evolution and benefits of EMS, the ISO 14001 principles, integration between ISO 9001 and 14001, the registration process, auditing an EMS, life cycle assessment, and environmental labelling. Upon successful completion of the course, students are encouraged to pursue formal accreditation.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under an ENVS 505 number may not take this course for credit.
ENVS 620 Advanced Topics in Environmental Assessment (3 credits)
This course focuses on selected topics within the discipline. Topics vary to permit investigation of current and developing theories and research areas.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. ENVS 620A, ENVS 620B, etc.
ENVS 664 Field Course in EA (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
The goal of this course is to expose students to practical issues related to Environmental Assessment (EA). The course comprises: (1) in-class preparation meetings followed by (2) a one-week in-field experience. During this week, students meet practitioners and individuals from local communities, industries and/or governments involved in EA. Through these interactions, students are exposed to a diverse range of perspectives and experiences related to EA. The course is validated through an assessment of the knowledge acquired during the trip. Students are responsible for the cost of food, accommodation and transportation associated with the one-week field trip (cost varies depending on destination).
Note: Students who have received credit for ENVS 662 may not take this course for credit.
GEOG 607 Indigenous Peoples and the Environment (3 credits)
This course provides an extended, in-depth exploration of the relationships and roles of Indigenous peoples with respect to their traditional territories and natural resources. Indigenous ontologies and epistemologies are highlighted in addition to Indigenous aspirations and approaches for use and stewardship of the environment. The course examines theoretical and case-study literature, with a broad regional focus on Aboriginal peoples in Canada while also drawing from comparative international experiences of Indigenous peoples.
GEOG 620 Special Topics in Geography (3 credits)
This course focuses on selected topics within the discipline. Topics vary to permit investigation of current and developing theories and research areas.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. GEOG 620A, GEOG 620B, etc.
HENV 610 Advanced Quantitative Research Methods (3 credits)
This course considers experimental design and advanced data analysis methods in Geography and Environmental Sciences. The course focuses on statistical analysis of quantitative data, using the R programming environment. Specific topics include data exploration and plotting, advanced statistical tests, linear regression, statistical model selection, non-parametric tests and mixed effects models.
HENV 625 Sustainable Resource Management (3 credits)
This seminar examines the impact of human activities on natural resources. Topics such as integrated management and exploitation practices, biodiversity and conservation, focusing particularly on forest and water resources from physical, chemical, biological, socio-economic, and technological perspectives are investigated.
HENV 660 Climate Change and Sustainability (3 credits)
This seminar examines the interface between climate science, and the demands and challenges of developing sustainable human societies. Class discussions are oriented around current literature on topics such as the potential impacts of climate change on vulnerable communities, strategies to enhance resilience and increase global equity in climate mitigation efforts, and opportunities to develop sustainable energy systems. The course also includes quantitative analysis and visualization of spatial change datasets.
HENV 655 Environmental Modelling (3 credits)
The different approaches to modelling the bio-physical, built or human environment are examined. The conceptualization of simple models to examine how human interventions affect the environment is investigated. Different modelling approaches such as system models, computer visualization and simulation are covered. Students develop a model scheme related to their thesis topic. Lectures and laboratory.
HENV 670 Environmental Governance (3 credits)
This course examines the principles, practices and institutions involved in environmental conservation and management as well as the sustainable exploitation of natural resources. Topics include sustainability, the precautionary principle, social capital, adaptive capacity, common property resource theories, deliberative democracy, environmental justice and environmental conflict resolution. Attention is given to issues of scale, particularly the mismatch of spatial, temporal and functional scales that characterize unsustainable management and use practices.
HENV 675 Community-Based Conservation (3 credits)
This course addresses the question of community participation in conservation and development initiatives. Focusing on the particular experience of local communities, it presents participatory concepts, principles, tools, and processes that have practical application to a broad range of contexts and settings.
Note: Students who have received credit for GEOG 607 may not take this course for credit.
HENV 680 Advanced Seminar in Environmental Science (3 credits)
This course provides an overview of current research in environmental and related scientific disciplines. The course involves seminars, presentations, and critical analysis of scientific literature, including discussion of cutting-edge research topics in fields such as ecological restoration, biodiversity, climate change, renewable energy, food and water security, and natural resource conservation.
HEXS 801 Scientific Communication and Pedagogy in Health and Exercise Science (3 credits), HEXS 820 Special Topics in Health and Exercise Science (3 credits).
6 credits chosen from HEXS 810, 811 or 812 Advanced Topics in Health and Exercise Science.
Comprehensive Exam in Health and Exercise Science. HEXS 850 (6 credits). The examining committee consists of the student’s supervisory committee and is chaired by the Graduate Program Director. The student is evaluated on the basis of the quality of the oral and written presentations and on the responses to the questions from the examining committee.
Research Proposal in Health and Exercise Science. HEXS 851 (3 credits). Students are required to write a research proposal describing a series of projects leading to the production of new knowledge from hypothesis-driven data acquisition and experimental inquiry. A supervisory committee including the supervisor and three additional faculty members (often the same as the comprehensive examination) with varied expertise related to the thesis topic is formed to guide the student with the production of the proposal. The proposal is presented in written form to the committee, and in oral form to the committee and department.
Research and Thesis in Health and Exercise Science. HEXS 890 (69 credits). Students are required to write a PhD research thesis, consisting of the production of new research knowledge from hypothesis-driven data acquisition and experimental inquiry. The research project should involve the integration of knowledge from the health sciences.The thesis is examined by a Thesis Examining Committee and is defended orally.
Academic Regulations
Academic Standing. Please refer to the Academic Standing section of the Calendar for a detailed review of the Academic Regulations.
Program Specific Requirements. Students must obtain an assessment grade point average (AGPA) of 3.00 based on a minimum of 6 credits.
Residence. The minimum residence requirement is two years (six terms) of full-time study beyond the master’s degree, or three years (nine terms) of full-time study beyond the bachelor’s degree.
Time Limit. All work for the doctoral degree must be completed by the end of the fourth calendar year following the year of admission to candidacy, defined as successful completion of the Comprehensive Exam in Health and Exercise Science (HEXS 850) and the Research Proposal in Health and Exercise Science (HEXS 851). Please refer to the Academic Regulation page for further details regarding the Time Limit requirements.
Graduation Requirement. In order to graduate, students must have a cumulative GPA of 3.00.
Courses
HEXS 801 Scientific Communication and Pedagogy in Health and Exercise Science (3 credits)
This course meets the needs of graduate students in developing adequate skills to communicate scientific information efficiently to different interest groups, such as grant adjudication committees, the general public, or undergraduate and graduate students in an academic setting. It serves in developing scientific communication skills by focusing on written and oral presentation skills, aimed at the scientists, students, or lay public. Faculty members from the department and selected guests provide information and applications on successful approaches to reach each of these groups. On the pedagogical side, it includes the development of course objectives and a course outline, along with preparing and presenting a lecture at the undergraduate level. It also involves presentation, discussion, and critical analysis of information from current scientific journal literature for scientists.
HEXS 810 Advanced Topics in Health and Exercise Science: Physiology Module (3 credits)
This course examines the fundamental mechanisms and the functional control of specific systems of the body. A detailed analysis of the system, including the molecular and systemic aspects of the given system is addressed. This course focuses on recent research outcomes and new issues in molecular and systemic physiology. The course content varies depending on the specific system studied.
HEXS 811 Advanced Topics in Health and Exercise Science: Intervention Module (3 credits)
This course examines concepts in the rehabilitation process from exercise adherence to tissue healing, and introduces students to various exercise protocols specific to the selected area of study. Students learn how to implement safe and effective rehabilitation protocols to address dysfunction and functional recovery. This course focuses on recent research outcomes and new issues in rehabilitation specific to prevention, assessment, and rehabilitation of injuries. The course content varies depending on the area of rehabilitation.
HEXS 812 Advanced Topics in Health and Exercise Science: Population Health Module (3 credits)
This course surveys the health-related aspects of exercise, physical activity, and physical fitness from a population health perspective. Topics include current debates in biomedical ethics, health policy, as well as, methods and concepts in behavioural and environmental determinants of activity and fitness.
HEXS 820 Special Topics in Health and Exercise Science (3 credits)
This course provides students with flexibility to address a specific area of specialization in Health and Exercise Science. This can be a reading course organized by the supervisor, a course chosen from the list of Advanced Topics courses, or a similar-level course from another department or institution, while being related to a specialization in Health and Exercise Science. The course is chosen in consultation with the student's supervisory committee. The course can be internal or external, and provides students with the capacity to specialize even further in relation to their research project.
HEXS 850 Comprehensive Exam in Health and Exercise Science (6 credits)
The comprehensive exam is given by an examination committee composed of selected faculty members, at the end of the first year of study. The committee includes the supervisor and three additional faculty members with varied expertise related to the thesis topic. The examination committee identifies selected readings for the student. The student is expected to prepare for both a written and an oral examination. The body of knowledge for the comprehensive examination is defined by the committee in the form of advanced book chapters and other scientific readings. The written exam comes first, composed of five (5) questions asked by the committee, in the form of argumentative essays written in the span of two weeks; following a satisfactory evaluation of this work, the student is convened to the oral part, comprising a series of questions coming from the panel concerning the written answers or additional aspects coming from the readings. The student has to successfully pass the comprehensive examination in order to progress to the proposal, usually the following term. The course is graded on a pass/fail basis.
HEXS 851 Research Proposal in Health and Exercise Science (3 credits)
Prerequisite: HEXS 850.
Students are required to write a research proposal describing a series of projects leading to the production of new knowledge from hypothesis-driven data acquisition and experimental inquiry. A supervisory committee including the supervisor and three additional faculty members (often the same as the comprehensive examination) with varied expertise related to the thesis topic is formed to guide the student with the production of the proposal. The proposal is presented in written form to the committee, and in oral form to the committee and department. The course is graded on a pass/fail basis.
HEXS 890 Research and Thesis in Health and Exercise Science (69 credits)
EXCI 610 – Statistics and Research Design (3 credits)
EXCI 612 – Laboratory Techniques (3 credits)
EXCI 624 – Special Topics Seminar (3 credits)
EXCI 626 – Thesis Proposal (3 credits)
EXCI 670 Thesis (33 credits)
OR
EXCI 680 – Thesis (Athletic Therapy) (33 credits)
OR
EXCI 690 – Thesis (Clinical Exercise Physiology) (33 credits)
Master of/Magisteriate in Science (Health and Exercise Science) (45 credits)
Year I
Fall (6 credits) EXCI 610 (3 credits), 624 (3 credits)
Winter (6 credits) EXCI 612 (3 credits), 626 (3 credits)
Year II
33 credits EXCI 670 (33 credits) or EXCI 680 (33 credits) or EXCI 690 (33 credits)
Course Descriptions
EXCI 610 Statistics and Research Design (3 credits)
This course provides students with a background in statistics and experimental design. Students are exposed to a variety of experimental designs applicable to the exercise sciences. The course covers the application of statistical concepts in consideration of specific experimental design methods. A number of parametric and non-parametric statistics are introduced for hypothesis testing, with the opportunity to apply relevant knowledge using various statistical software packages.
EXCI 612 Laboratory Techniques (3 credits)
The course provides a theoretical awareness of measurement principles and offers practical experience in applying techniques common to advanced research methodologies in exercise science. The potential topics to be covered are geared towards the requirements of the individual in the areas of exercise physiology and athletic therapy. These may include such topics as data acquisition and analysis, electromyography, blood flow methodologies, spectrophotometry, pulmonary gas exchange, motion analysis, and tissue histochemistry.
EXCI 624 Special Topics Seminar (3 credits)
This course is designed to meet the special needs of graduate students in the exercise science areas of concentration specific to athletic therapy and clinical exercise physiology. Topics vary within the domain to account for investigation of current and developing theories. The course involves presentation, discussion, and critical analysis of information from current scientific journal literature.
EXCI 626 Thesis Proposal (3 credits)
This course provides students with the opportunity to choose a research topic and formulate a research proposal under the supervision of a thesis advisor. The proposal should include a literature review, rationale, hypothesis, and methodology including the planned research design and data analysis. Students are required to present a seminar in the Department on their research prior to the presentation of their proposal to the thesis advisory committee.
EXCI 670 Thesis (33 credits)
Prerequisite: EXCI 626.
Students are required to demonstrate their ability to carry out independent research which reflects a scientific approach. In addition to a written final thesis, a public oral examination is conducted to test the student's ability to defend the thesis.
EXCI 680 Thesis (Athletic Therapy) (33 credits)
Prerequisite: EXCI 626.
Students are required to demonstrate their ability to carry out independent research which reflects a scientific approach. In addition to a written final thesis, a public oral examination is conducted to test the student's ability to defend the thesis.
EXCI 690 Thesis (Clinical Exercise Physiology) (33 credits)
Prerequisite: EXCI 626.
Students are required to demonstrate their ability to carry out independent research which reflects a scientific approach. In addition to a written final thesis, a public oral examination is conducted to test the student's ability to defend the thesis.
EXCI 698 Selected Topics in Exercise Science (3 credits)
This course explores themes within the area of Exercise Science.
HIST 877 Comprehensive Minor Field Tutorial (3 credits)
Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course provided that the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. HIST 877A, HIST 877B, etc.
HIST 878 Comprehensive Major Field Tutorial (6 credits)
HIST 880 Comprehensive Examinations (12 credits)
HIST 885 PhD Thesis Proposal and Colloquium (6 credits)
HIST 889 Doctoral Seminar (6 credits)
HIST 890 Thesis Research (54 credits)
HIST 600 The Nature of Historical Knowledge (3 credits)
This course examines the history of the discipline and the nature of historical knowledge, as well as contemporary debates about the meaning and practice of history. The content varies from term to term depending on the instructor(s). The material covered may include the following: research tools (e.g. library resources, the archives and the Internet), major approaches to history (e.g. Marxist, Annaliste, feminist), the debate about objectivity and truth in history, public history (history in film, television, schools, museums), and the impact of postmodernism on historical practice.
HIST 601 Historical Research Methods (3 credits)
This course guides students in the intial stages of developing an MA thesis topic and elaborating a substantial research proposal.
European History
HIST 610 Selected Topics in European History (3 credits)
Canadian History
HIST 620 Selected Topics in Canadian History (3 credits)
United States History
HIST 630 Selected Topics in US History (3 credits)
Latin American and Caribbean History
HIST 634 Selected Topics in Latin American and Caribbean History (3 credits)
Asian History
HIST 638 Selected Topics in Asian History (3 credits)
Middle Eastern History
HIST 642 Selected Topics in Middle Eastern History (3 credits)
African History
HIST 646 Selected Topics in African History (3 credits)
History of Genocide and Human Rights
HIST 650 Selected Topics in the History of Genocide and Human Rights (3 credits)
History of Gender and Sexuality
HIST 660 Selected Topics in the History of Gender and Sexuality (3 credits)
Public History
HIST 665 Selected Topics in Public History (3 credits)
Selected Areas of History
HIST 670 Selected Topics in History (3 credits)
HIST 679 Tutorial in a Selected Area of History (3 credits)
Research, Theses, and Comprehensive Examinations
HIST 685 MA Thesis (30 credits)
HUMA 891 Comprehensive Examination Major Field (3 credits)
HUMA 892 Comprehensive Examination Minor Field I (3 credits)
HUMA 893 Comprehensive Examination Minor Field II (3 credits)
Thesis Proposal with Defence (HUMA 894). Upon completion of the required coursework and three comprehensive field examinations, students are admitted to candidacy following acceptance by their advisory committee of the written thesis proposal and its successful oral defence. The thesis proposal should be integrative in character, bringing the student’s three fields to bear on the thesis project and laying the groundwork for the thesis.
Thesis (HUMA 895). A doctoral thesis should be based on extensive research in primary sources, make a significant and original contribution to knowledge, and be presented in a manner that conceptually and formally accords with scholarly standards. Students may produce a research-creation thesis with the approval of the student’s advisory committee and the Humanities Program Director. In accordance with the thesis guidelines of the School of Graduate Studies, a research-creation thesis normally comprises two synthesized components: a creative production component (which may be presented in a variety of media, communicative, or performative platforms) and a written scholarly component. The written scholarly component of the research-creation thesis should demonstrate substantial knowledge of the relevant scholarly literature, consider methodological issues, and present a contribution to knowledge. In addition, the research-creation thesis must demonstrate knowledge of prevailing practices and precedents in the practical field of activity in which the creative production component situates itself, and may reflect on the production process.
Language Requirement. Prior to submission of their thesis, doctoral candidates are required to demonstrate an ability to read and translate scholarly material in at least one language (other than the language of their thesis) relevant to their studies.
Academic Regulations
Academic Standing. Please refer to the Academic Standing section of the Calendar for a detailed review of the Academic Regulations.
Residence. The minimum residence requirement is two years (6 terms) of full-time study, or the equivalent in part-time study.
Time Limit. Please refer to the Academic Regulation page for further details regarding the Time Limit requirements.
Graduation Requirement. In order to graduate, students must have a cumulative GPA of at least 3.00.
Courses
Required Courses
HUMA 888 Seminar in Interdisciplinary Studies I (3 credits)
A required core seminar to be taken by all students within their first year in the program. This course engages with theories and methods of interdisciplinarity germane to the humanities, social sciences and fine arts, including those pertinent to research-creation. Its objectives include enhancing awareness of the role of conceptual frameworks and institutional practices in the shaping of interdisciplinary scholarly and creative explorations, and providing students with opportunities to begin pursuing theoretical and methodological issues vital to their individual interdisciplinary projects.
HUMA 889 Seminar in Interdisciplinary Studies II (3 credits)
A required core seminar to be taken by all students within their first year in the program. Each year a different topic or approach is selected with the aim of exploring how it is pursued and challenged across disciplinary boundaries.
Elective Courses
HUMA 884 Directed Studies (3 credits)
A directed study course provides students with the opportunity to pursue advanced and focused work with individual faculty members in the fields that constitute the student's program of study. Directed study courses are designated by the course topic.
HUMA 887 Advanced Seminar in Special Topics in Interdisciplinary Studies (3 credits)
This seminar examines in-depth special topics in interdisciplinary studies.
Note: The content varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may reregister for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated by the course topic following the HUMA 887 course title.
Comprehensive Examinations and Thesis
HUMA 891 Comprehensive Examination Major Field (3 credits)
HUMA 892 Comprehensive Examination Minor Field I (3 credits)
HUMA 893 Comprehensive Examination Minor Field II (3 credits)
HUMA 894 Thesis Proposal with Defence (6 credits)
HUMA 895 Thesis (57 credits)
JOUR 601 Critical Approaches to Journalistic Thought (3 credits)
JOUR 604 Research Methods for Journalism (3 credits)
JOUR 605 Digital Innovation in Journalism (3 credits)
Choose two of the following elective courses:
JOUR 502 Introduction to Reporting (3 credits)
JOUR 503 Introduction to Visual Journalism (3 credits)
JOUR 511 Introduction to Multimedia (3 credits)
JOUR 523 News and Feature Photography (3 credits)
JOUR 603 Political Economy of Journalism (3 credits)
JOUR 610 International Journalism (3 credits)
JOUR 620 Journalism Ethics and the Law (3 credits)
JOUR 630 Mediating Diversity through Audio Story-telling (3 credits)
JOUR 640 Textual Approaches to Journalism (3 credits)
JOUR 642 Special Topics in Journalism Studies (3 credits)
JOUR 645 Directed Study (3 credits)
* With the permission of the department, up to six elective credits may be taken in 600-level courses offered by other departments.
Research Requirements and Options.
Option A.
JOUR 650 Journalism Readings and Proposal (6 credits)
JOUR 691 Thesis (24 credits)
OR
Option B.
JOUR 650 Journalism Readings and Proposal (6 credits)
JOUR 693 Research-Creation Thesis (24 credits)
OR
Option C.
JOUR 694 Essay (18 credits)
12 additional course credits in consultation with the student’s faculty advisor and approved by the Department’s MA program director.
Academic Regulations
Academic Standing. Please refer to the Academic Standing section of the Calendar for a detailed review of the Academic Regulations.
Residence. The minimum residence requirement is one year (3 terms) of full-time study, or the equivalent in part-time study
Time Limit. Please refer to the Academic Regulation page for further details regarding the Time Limit requirements.
Graduation Requirement. In order to graduate, students must have a cumulative GPA of at least 2.70.
Courses
JOUR 502 Introduction to Reporting (3 credits)
This is a comprehensive lecture/laboratory course which lays the foundations for the writing and reporting demands of journalism. Students are introduced to the salient features of print and digital formats, and receive assignments in information-gathering and writing both in class and in the field.
JOUR 503 Introduction to Visual Journalism (3 credits)
This workshop course lays the foundation for the visual aspects of journalistic story-telling. Working with digital, single-lens reflex cameras, students acquire fundamental skills for the practice of visual journalism, becoming familiar with a variety of aesthetic, technical, ethical and theoretical concerns involved in the visual production of meaning.
JOUR 511 Introduction to Multimedia (3 credits)
This course is an introduction to the use of technology across audio and visual news platforms, including audio, visual and digital equipment and software. Students learn the necessary professional, technical and aesthetic skills to produce editorially sound audio and visual stories.
JOUR 523 News and Feature Photography (3 credits)
This workshop course covers a range of journalistic topics – hard news, general news, features, arts, sports – to emphasize the thematic particularities of visual story-telling. The course requires students to consider and incorporate the narrative and representative dimensions of visual journalism through a variety of assignments.
JOUR 601 Critical Approaches to Journalistic Thought (3 credits)
This course  introduces students to a scholarly critique of journalism, both as a practice and as an institution. Students examine specific readings from an overlapping social, political and economic context to consider the role of journalists as cultural producers.
JOUR 603 Political Economy of Journalism (3 credits)
This course considers journalism through its organization as a cultural industry and critically evaluates journalism’s economic structures and the impact those structures have on journalism practice. Topics may include media economics, free-market theory, media ownership, the role of the government and the role of organized labour.
JOUR 604 Research Methods for Journalism (3 credits)
This course examines a variety of research methods commonly used in the production and study of journalism, from both qualitative and quantitative perspectives. Emphasis is placed on primary sources, access to information requests, and electronic databases with a goal of helping students develop their own research practice.
JOUR 605 Digital Innovation in Journalism (3 credits)
This course offers lectures and workshops in digital innovation and web design, with a focus on design features related to journalism production and news platforms.
JOUR 610 International Journalism (3 credits)
Prerequisite: JOUR 601 previously or concurrently.
This course examines journalism as a cross-cultural and global practice, addressing such issues as media representation, multiculturalism, globalization and international news flows.
JOUR 620 Journalism Ethics and the Law (3 credits)
Prerequisite: JOUR 601 previously or concurrently or permission of the program director.
This course examines the journalist’s responsibility in terms of both ethics and the law. It introduces students to a representative cross-section of ethical theories and codes and takes an intensive look at the most common legal issues affecting the practice of journalism.
JOUR 630 Mediating Diversity through Audio Story-telling (3 credits)
Prerequisite: JOUR 601 previously or concurrently or permission of the program director.
The course is an experiential workshop that blends journalism theory and practice. Students function both as reporters, in order to learn the skills necessary to produce robust audio stories, and digital researchers tasked with examining diversity and media representation issues arising in class to explore journalism’s mediating function in society.
JOUR 640 Textual Approaches to Journalism (3 credits)
Prerequisite: JOUR 601 previously or concurrently.
This course concentrates on journalism’s use of all forms of language, from written text to sounds and images. Drawing from the literature on linguistics, semiotics, textual and discourse analysis, students consider ways in which journalists, through their use of language to describe and depict people, events, institutions and ideas, become implicated in the news they report.
JOUR 642 Special Topics in Journalism Studies (3 credits)
This seminar permits the in-depth examination of particular special topics in digital innovation in journalism studies. Topics vary from year to year.
JOUR 645 Directed Study (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the MA Program Director.
Students may enrol in a directed study under faculty supervision in order to undertake a specialized study of theoretical or research-related topics.
JOUR 650 Journalism Readings and Proposal (6 credits)
Prerequisite: JOUR 601.
In consultation with the faculty advisor, the student reviews relevant literature pertinent to the research topic and writes a thesis proposal demonstrating knowledge based upon the review of the scholarly literature.
JOUR 691 Thesis (24 credits)
Prerequisite: JOUR 650.
The thesis is researched and written under the direction of a supervisor. Upon completion, it is submitted to the student’s Thesis Committee. The thesis is defended in an oral examination before the Thesis Committee.
JOUR 693 Research-Creation Thesis (24 credits)
Prerequisite: JOUR 650.
The Research-Creation Thesis is specifically designed for students with media production experience who wish to complete an original media production using a suitable media platform, complemented by a text of approximately 10,000 words comprising a literature and media review, a theoretical and methodological contextualization, and a critical reflection on the project and its outcomes.
JOUR 694 Essay (18 credits)
Prerequisites: JOUR 601, 604, 605.
Students produce an essay on a research topic developed in consultation with a  faculty member that explores a specific issue relevant to journalism studies. The final essay must be evaluated by a second faculty member. The essay's length is approximately 40 pages, which does not include a bibliography. The course is normally taken in term five of the students' degree.
JOUR 500 Critical Approaches to Journalism (3 credits)
This course introduces students to a scholarly critique of journalism, both as a practice and as an institution. By interrogating specific readings, students are encouraged to consider the journalist as a cultural producer operating within overlapping social, political and economic contexts.
JOUR 501 Research Methods for Journalism (3 credits)
This course introduces students to research methods with a focus on primary sources, such as official documents, legal and financial records, access to information requests, electronic databases, as well as in-depth interviews. These methods are treated as both sources of story ideas and as essential elements of good reporting.
JOUR 502 Introduction to Reporting (3 credits)
This is a comprehensive lecture/laboratory course which lays the foundations for the writing and reporting demands of journalism. Students are introduced to the salient features of print and digital formats, and receive assignments in information-gathering and writing both in class and in the field.
JOUR 504 Intermediate Reporting (3 credits)
Prerequisite: JOUR 502.
This course is intended to consolidate the reporting and writing skills learned during the summer. Through lectures and laboratory work, students expand their knowledge of information-gathering and writing techniques, including short deadline news reporting and feature writing.
JOUR 505 Advanced Reporting (3 credits)
This workshop offers students the opportunity to perfect their reporting and writing skills and to undertake long form writing projects, ranging from beat reporting to magazine writing.
JOUR 508 Research Project (3 credits)
The project is to be a comprehensive study and report on some area of modern media practice, or on the interaction of media and society. The subject and method must be approved in advance by the instructor of the course.
JOUR 510 Web Editing and Page Design (3 credits)
Prerequisite: JOUR 501.
This course offers lectures and workshops in web editing and page design. Specific focus is given to design features related to journalism production and news platforms.
JOUR 511 Introduction to Multimedia (3 credits)
This course is an introduction to the use of technology across audio and visual news platforms, including audio, visual and digital equipment and software. Students learn the necessary professional, technical and aesthetic skills to produce editorially sound audio and visual stories.
JOUR 513 Journalism Ethics and the Law (3 credits)
This course examines the journalist’s responsibility in terms of both ethics and the law. It introduces students to a representative cross-section of ethical theories and codes and takes an intensive look at the most common legal issues affecting the practice of journalism.
JOUR 528 The Digital Magazine (3 credits)
This course requires students to produce the Department’s Digital Magazine. The course replicates the working conditions and journalistic experience of a digital newsroom. Students are expected to work in editorial teams to create current and update multimedia content throughout the term.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a JOUR 525 number may not take this course for credit.
JOUR 530 Advanced Radio News (3 credits)
This is a workshop course in which students function as reporters, writers, news readers and editors in order to learn the skills necessary to produce daily newscasts.
JOUR 532 Documentary Video and Radio (3 credits)
This workshop allows students to perfect their skills in long format public affairs broadcasting in sound and pictures. Students learn the fundamentals of documentary production including story developments and treatment,cinematographic style, interviewing, editing and presentation.
JOUR 536 Advanced Video Journalism (3 credits)
This course gives students the opportunity to perfect their skills in writing and reporting for video journalism and producing news and public affairs programming.
JOUR 542 International Journalism (3 credits)
This course examines the way journalism is practiced in a selected country or tradition. The focus of the course may change from year to year.
JOUR 566 Photojournalism (3 credits)
Using digital cameras and technology, students perform a variety of exercises and assignments to help them master the techniques used in planning, taking, and laying out news photographs.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a JOUR 525 number may not take this course for credit.
JOUR 500 Critical Approaches to Journalism (3 credits)
This course introduces students to a scholarly critique of journalism, both as a practice and as an institution. By interrogating specific readings, students are encouraged to consider the journalist as a cultural producer operating within overlapping social, political and economic contexts.
JOUR 501 Research Methods for Journalism (3 credits)
This course introduces students to research methods with a focus on primary sources, such as official documents, legal and financial records, access to information requests, electronic databases, as well as in-depth interviews. These methods are treated as both sources of story ideas and as essential elements of good reporting.
JOUR 502 Introduction to Reporting (3 credits)
This is a comprehensive lecture/laboratory course which lays the foundations for the writing and reporting demands of journalism. Students are introduced to the salient features of print and digital formats, and receive assignments in information-gathering and writing both in class and in the field.
JOUR 503 Introduction to Visual Journalism (3 credits)
This workshop course lays the foundation for the visual aspects of journalistic story-telling. Working with digital, single-lens reflex cameras, students acquire fundamental skills for the practice of visual journalism, becoming familiar with a variety of aesthetic, technical, ethical and theoretical concerns involved in the visual production of meaning.
JOUR 507 Basics of Digital Imaging (3 credits)
This workshop course introduces students to the fundamental concepts of editing news photographs. Working with actual news photographs and editing software, students learn to weigh aesthetic and technical considerations with the ethical and theoretical aspects involved in the visual production of meaning.
JOUR 508 Research Project (3 credits)
The project is to be a comprehensive study and report on some area of modern media practice, or on the interaction of media and society. The subject and method must be approved in advance by the instructor of the course.
JOUR 511 Introduction to Multimedia (3 credits)
This course is an introduction to the use of technology across audio and visual news platforms, including audio, visual and digital equipment and software. Students learn the necessary professional, technical and aesthetic skills to produce editorially sound audio and visual stories.
JOUR 513 Journalism Ethics and the Law (3 credits)
This course examines the journalist’s responsibility in terms of both ethics and the law. It introduces students to a representative cross-section of ethical theories and codes and takes an intensive look at the most common legal issues affecting the practice of journalism.
JOUR 521 Visual Story-Telling (3 credits)
This workshop introduces students to the dynamic and aural elements of visual story-telling in the context of multi-platform journalism. Students acquire technical skills of video and sound capture through instruction that brings to bear aesthetic, ethical and theoretical considerations.
JOUR 523 News and Feature Photography (3 credits)
This workshop course covers a range of journalistic topics – hard news, general news, features, arts, sports – to emphasize the thematic particularities of visual story-telling. The course requires students to consider and incorporate the narrative and representative dimensions of visual journalism through a variety of assignments.
JOUR 527 Elements of Lighting for Visual Journalism (3 credits)
This workshop course introduces students to lighting techniques for both still photography and video story-telling. Students learn to weigh technical and aesthetic aspects of lighting with the ethical and theoretical dimensions involved in the manipulation or alteration of the shooting environment.
JOUR 528 The Digital Magazine (3 credits)
This course requires students to produce the Department’s Digital Magazine. The course replicates the working conditions and journalistic experience of a digital newsroom. Students are expected to work in editorial teams to create current and update multimedia content throughout the term.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a JOUR 525 number may not take this course for credit.
JOUR 531 Visual Journalism Photo Editing (3 credits)
This advanced workshop course covers the decision-making process for news, magazine and online photography, treating photo editing as a collaborative element of visual journalism. Moving beyond aesthetic and technical aspects, it situates editing within the larger context of news production, such as collaborating with reporters, editors and photo editors in the story-telling process.
JOUR 532 Documentary Video and Radio (3 credits)
This workshop allows students to perfect their skills in long format public affairs broadcasting in sound and pictures. Students learn the fundamentals of documentary production including story developments and treatment,cinematographic style, interviewing, editing and presentation.
JOUR 535 Documentary and Photographic Series (3 credits)
This advanced workshop course concentrates on the photo story, the editorial essay and the documentary essay. The course emphasizes pre-visualization, planning, logistics and realization as well as optimizing series for newspaper, magazine and online publications.
JOUR 536 Advanced Video Journalism (3 credits)
This course gives students the opportunity to perfect their skills in writing and reporting for video journalism and producing news and public affairs programming.
JOUR 537 Visual Journalism Portfolio (3 credits)
This advanced capstone workshop focuses on students creating professional portfolios, helping them create and establish their individual brands as professional visual journalists.
MAST 830 Cyclotomic Fields (3 credits)
L-series, Dirichlet theorem, Gauss sums, Stickelberger theorem, class groups and class number, circular units, analytic formulae.
MAST 831 Class Field Theory (3 credits)
Local and global class field theory, ideles and adeles, reciprocity laws, existence theorem.
MAST 832 Elliptic Curves (3 credits)
Introduction to elliptic curves over finite fields, local and global fields, rational points, Mordell-Weil theorem, formal groups.
MAST 833 Selected Topics in Number Theory (3 credits)
MAST 834 Selected Topics in Computational Algebra (3 credits)
Analysis
MAST 837 Selected Topics in Analysis (3 credits)
MAST 838 Selected Topics in Pure Mathematics (3 credits)
Mathematical Physics and Differential Geometry
MAST 840 Lie Groups (3 credits)
The mathematical theory of Lie groups and introduction to their representation theory with applications to mathematical physics. Topics will include classical Lie groups, one-parameter subgroups, Lie algebras and the exponential mapping, adjoint and coadjoint representations, roots and weights, the Killing form, semi-direct products, Haar measure and decompositions such as those of Cartan and Iwasawa. The theory of unitary representations on Hilbert spaces. Physical applications of compact Lie groups (such as SU(2) and SU(3)) and non-compact groups (such as the Lorentz and Poincaré groups).
MAST 841 Partial Differential Equations (P.D.E.’s) (3 credits)
Introduction to the mathematical theory of P.D.E.’s, including applications to mathematical physics. Topics will include Sturm-Liouville systems, boundary value and eigenvalue problems, Green’s functions for time-independent and time-dependent equations, Laplace and Fourier transform methods. Additional topics will be selected from the theory of elliptic equations (e.g. Laplace and Poisson equations), hyperbolic equations (e.g., the Cauchy problem for the wave equation) and parabolic equations (e.g., the Cauchy problem for the heat equation). Links will be made with the theory of differential operators and with analysis on manifolds.
MAST 851 Differential Geometric Methods in Physics (3 credits)
Manifolds, differential systems, Riemannian, Kahlerian and symplectic geometry, bundles, supermanifolds with applications to relativity, quantization, gauge field theory and Hamiltonian systems.
MAST 852 Algebro-Geometric Methods in Physics (3 credits)
Algebraic curves, Jacobi varieties, theta functions, moduli spaces of holomorphic bundles and algebraic curves, rational maps, sheaves and cohomology with applications to gauge theory, relativity and integrable systems.
MAST 853 Gauge Theory and Relativity (3 credits)
Yang-Mills theory, connections of fibre bundles, spinors, twistors, classical solutions, invariance groups, instantons, monopoles, topological invariants, Einstein equations, equations of motion, Kaluza-Klein, cosmological models, gravitational singularities.
MAST 854 Quantization Methods (3 credits)
Geometric quantization, Borel quantization, Mackey quantization, stochastic and phase space quantization, the problems of prequantization and polarization, deformation theory, dequantization.
MAST 855 Spectral Geometry (3 credits)
Schrödinger operators; min-max characterization of eigenvalues, geometry of the spectrum in parameter space, kinetic potentials, spectral approximation theory, linear combinations and smooth transformations of potentials, applications to the N-body problem.
MAST 856 Selected Topics in Mathematical Physics (3 credits)
MAST 857 Selected Topics in Differential Geometry (3 credits)
Dynamical Systems
MAST 860 Differentiable Dynamical Systems (3 credits)
The study of dynamical properties of diffeomorphisms or of one-parameter groups of diffeomorphisms (flows) defined on differentiable manifolds. Periodic points, the non-wandering set, and more general invariant sets. Smale’s horseshoe, Anosov, and Morse-Smale systems, general hyperbolic systems, the stable manifold theorem, various forms of stability, Markov partitions and symbolic dynamics.
MAST 861 Absolutely Continuous Invariant Measures (3 credits)
Review of functional analysis, Frobenius-Perron operator and its properties, existence of absolutely continuous invariant measures for piecewise expanding transformations, properties of invariant densities, compactness of invariant densities, spectral decomposition of the Frobenius-Perron operator, bounds on the number of absolutely continuous invariant measures, perturbations of absolutely continuous invariant measures.
MAST 862 Numerical Analysis of Nonlinear Problems (3 credits)
Continuation of solutions, homotopy methods, asymptotic stability, bifurcations, branch switching, limit points and higher order singularities, Hopf bifurcation, control of nonlinear phenomena, ODE with boundary and integral constraints, discretization, numerical stability and multiplicity, periodic solutions, Floquet multipliers, period doubling, tori, control of Hopf bifurcation and periodic solutions, travelling waves, rotations, bifurcation phenomena in partial differential equations, degenerate systems.
MAST 863 Bifurcation Theory of Vector Fields (3 credits)
Local and global bifurcations. Generalized Hopf bifurcation and generalized homoclinic bifurcation. Hamiltonian systems and systems close to Hamiltonian systems, local codimension two bifurcations of flows.
MAST 865 Selected Topics in Dynamical Systems (3 credits)
Statistics and Actuarial Mathematics
MAST 871 Advanced Probability Theory (3 credits)
Definition of probability spaces, review of convergence concepts, conditioning and the Markov property, introduction to stochastic processes and martingales.
MAST 872 Stochastic Processes (3 credits)
Stochastic sequences, martingales and semi-martingales, Gaussian processes, processes with independent increments, Markov processes, limit theorems for stochastic processes.
MAST 873 Advanced Statistical Inference (3 credits)
Decision functions, randomization, optimal decision rules, the form of Bayes’ rule for estimation problems, admissibility and completeness, minimax, rules, invariant statistical decisions, admissible and minimax decision rules, uniformly most powerful tests, unbiased tests, locally best tests, general linear hypothesis, multiple decision problems.
MAST 874 Advanced Multivariate Inference (3 credits)
Wishart distribution, analysis of dispersion , tests of linear hypotheses, Rao’s test for additional information, test for dimensionality, principal component analysis, discriminant analysis, Mahalanobis distance, cluster analysis, relations with sets of variates.
MAST 875 Advanced Sampling (3 credits)
Unequal probability sampling, multistage sampling, super population models, Bayes and empirical Bayes estimation, estimation of variance from complex surveys, non-response errors and multivariate auxiliary information.
MAST 876 Survival Analysis (3 credits)
Failure time models, inference in parametric models, proportional hazards, non-parametric inference, multivariate failure time data, competing risks.
MAST 877 Reliability Theory (3 credits)
Reliability performance measures, unrepairable systems, repairable systems, load-strength reliability models, distributions with monotone failure rates, analysis of performance effectiveness, optimal redundancy, heuristic methods in reliability.
MAST 878 Advanced Risk Theory (3 credits)
Generalizations of the classical risk model, renewal processes, Cox processes, diffusion models, ruin theory and optimal surplus control.
MAST 881 Selected Topics in Probability, Statistics and Actuarial Mathematics (3 credits)
Seminars
MAST 858 Seminar in Mathematical Physics (3 credits)
MAST 859 Seminar in Differential Geometry (3 credits)
MAST 868 Seminar in Dynamical Systems (3 credits)
MAST 889 Seminar in Probability, Statistics and Actuarial Mathematics (3 credits)
MAST 898 Seminar in Number Theory (3 credits)
MAST 899 Seminar in Computational Algebra (3 credits)
Thesis and Comprehensive Examinations
MAST 890 Comprehensive Examination A (6 credits)
MAST 891 Comprehensive Examination B (6 credits)
MAST 892 Doctoral Thesis (60 credits)
MAST 651 The Contributions of Mathematics to Intellectual Life (3 credits)
This course examines several major mathematical advances over the centuries in the historical and intellectual contexts of the day and also focuses on the developments of a particular branch of mathematics over the more recent past. Examples may include recent advances in number theory and geometry leading to a proof of Fermat’s Last Theorem and applications of number theory to cryptography.
MAST 652 Topics in Research in Mathematics Education (3 credits)
The general aim of this course is to acquaint students with research problems in mathematics education and ways of approaching them (theoretical frameworks and research methodologies).
Note: The content varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course provided the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated by the title of the course.
MAST 653 Topics in the Foundations of Mathematics (3 credits)
This course focuses on foundational issues and developments in mathematics, with topics chosen from particular branches of mathematics, e.g., geometry (Euclidean and non-Euclidean geometries; comparison of Euclid’s “Elements” with Hilbert’s “Grundlagen der Geometrie”, etc.), or logic (evolution of logic from Aristotle to Boole; Hilbert’s program; Gödel’s Incompleteness theorems, etc.). It may also look at foundational problems in mathematics suggested by physics and other sciences. More general, philosophical, epistemological and methodological questions about the nature of mathematics may also be chosen as topics for the course.
Note: The content varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course provided the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated by the title of the course.
MAST 654 Topics in the History of Mathematics (3 credits)
This course may focus on a particular epoch and place in the history of mathematics (e.g., Ancient Greek, Indian and Chinese mathematics; the development of mathematics in Europe in the 17th to 19th centuries, etc.), or on the history of a particular area of mathematics (history of geometry, algebra, analysis, number theory, etc.). Aspects related to the history of approaches to teaching mathematics may also be addressed.
Note: The content varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course provided the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated bythe title of the course.
Topology and Geometry
MAST 655 Topology (3 credits)
Topological spaces. Order, product, subspace, quotient topologies. Continuous functions. Compactness and connectedness. The fundamental group and covering spaces.
MAST 656 Differential Geometry (3 credits)
Mappings, functions and vectors fields on Rn, inverse and implicit function theorem, differentiable manifolds, immersions, submanifolds, Lie groups, transformation groups, tangent and cotangent bundles, vector fields, flows, Lie derivatives, Frobenius’ theorem, tensors, tensor fields, differential forms, exterior differential calculus, partitions of unity, integration on manifolds, Stokes’ theorem, Poincaré lemma, introduction to symplectic geometry and Hamiltonian systems.
MAST 657 Manifolds (3 credits)
MAST 658 Lie Groups (3 credits)
Analysis
MAST 661 Topics in Analysis (3 credits)
MAST 662 Functional Analysis I (3 credits)
This course will be an introduction to the theory of Hilbert spaces and the spectral analysis of self-adjoint and normal operators on Hilbert spaces. Applications could include Stone’s theorem on one parameter groups and/or reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces.
MAST 663 Introduction to Ergodic Theory (3 credits)
This course covers the following topics: measurable transformations, functional analysis review, the Birkhoff Ergodic Theorem, the Mean Ergodic Theorem, recurrence, ergodicity, mixing, examples, entrophy, invariant measures and existence of invariant measures.
MAST 664 Dynamical Systems (3 credits)
An introduction to the range of dynamical behaviour exhibited by one-dimensional dynamical systems. Recurrence, hyperbolicity, chaotic behaviour, topological conjugacy, structural stability, and bifurcation theory for one-parameter families of transformation. The study of unimodal functions on the interval such as the family Fr (X) = rx (1-x), where 0 ≤ r ≤ 4 . For general continuous maps of the interval, the structure of the set of periodic orbits, for example, is found in the theorem of Sarkovskii.
MAST 665 Complex Analysis (3 credits)
Review of Cauchy-Riemann equations, holomorphic and meromorphic functions, Cauchy integral theorem, calculus of residues, Laurent series, elementary multiple-valued functions, periodic meromorphic functions, elliptic functions of Jacobi and Wierstrass, elliptic integrals, theta functions. Riemann surfaces, uniformization, algebraic curves, abelian integrals, the Abel map, Riemann theta functions, Abel’s theorem, Jacobi varieties, Jacobi inversion problem. Applications to differential equations.
MAST 666 Differential Equations (3 credits)
MAST 667 Reading Course in Analysis (3 credits)
MAST 668 Transform Calculus (3 credits)
MAST 669 Measure Theory (3 credits)
Measure and integration, measure spaces, convergence theorems, Radon-Nikodem theorem, measure and outer measure, extension theorem, product measures, Hausdorf measure, Lp-spaces, Riesz theorem, bounded linear functionals on C(X), conditional expectations and martingales.
Statistics and Actuarial Mathematics
MAST 670 Mathematical Methods in Statistics (3 credits)
This course will discuss mathematical topics which may be used concurrently or subsequently in other statistics stream courses. The topics will come mainly from the following broad categories; 1) geometry of Euclidean space; 2) matrix theory and distribution of quadratic forms; 3) measure theory applications (Reimann-Stieltjes integrals); 4) complex variables (characteristic functions and inversion); 5) inequalities (Cauchy-Schwarz, Holder, Minkowski, etc.) and numerical techniques (Newton-Raphson algorithm, scoring method, statistical differentials); 6) some topics from probability theory.
MAST 671 Probability Theory (3 credits)
Axiomatic construction of probability; characteristic and generating functions; probabilistic models in reliability theory; laws of large numbers; infinitely divisible distributions; the asymptotic theory of extreme order statistics.
MAST 672 Statistical Inference I (3 credits)
Order statistics; estimation theory; properties of estimators; maximum likelihood method; Bayes estimation; sufficiency and completeness; interval estimation; shortest length confidence interval; Bayesian intervals; sequential estimation.
MAST 673 Statistical Inference II (3 credits)
Testing of hypotheses; Neyman-Pearson theory; optimal tests; linear hypotheses; invariance; sequential analysis.
MAST 674 Multivariate Analysis (3 credits)
An introduction to multivariate distributions will be provided; multivariate normal distribution and its properties will be investigated. Estimation and testing problems related with multivariate normal populations will be discussed with emphasis on Hotelling’s generalized T2 and Wishart distribution. Other multivariate techniques including MANOVA; canonical correlations and principal components may also be introduced.
MAST 675 Sample Surveys (3 credits)
A review of statistical techniques and simple random sampling, varying probability sampling, stratified sampling, cluster and systematic sampling-ratio and product estimators.
MAST 676 Linear Models (3 credits)
Matrix approach to development and prediction in linear models will be used. Statistical inferences on the parameters will be discussed after development of proper distribution theory. The concept of generalized inverse will be fully developed and analysis of variance models with fixed and mixed effects will be analyzed.
MAST 677 Time Series (3 credits)
Statistical analysis of time series in the time domain. Moving average and exponential smoothing methods to forecast seasonal and non-seasonal time series, construction of prediction intervals for future observations, Box-Jenkins ARIMA models and their applications to forecasting seasonal and non-seasonal time series. A substantial portion of the course will involve computer analysis of time series using computer packages (mainly MINITAB). No prior computer knowledge is required.
MAST 678 Statistical Consulting and Data Analysis (3 credits)
MAST 679 Topics in Statistics and Probability (3 credits)
MAST 720 Survival Analysis (3 credits)
Parametric and non-parametric failure time models; proportional hazards; competing risks.
MAST 721 Advanced Actuarial Mathematics (3 credits)
General risk contingencies; advanced multiple life theory; population theory; funding methods and dynamic control.
MAST 722 Advanced Pension Mathematics (3 credits)
Valuation methods, gains and losses, stochastic returns, dynamic control.
MAST 723 Portfolio Theory (3 credits)
Asset and liability management models, optimal portfolio selection, stochastic returns, special topics.
MAST 724 Risk Theory (3 credits)
General risk models; renewal processes; Cox processes; surplus control.
MAST 725 Credibility Theory (3 credits)
Classical, regression and hierarchical Bayes models, empirical credibility, robust credibility, special topics.
MAST 726 Loss Distributions (3 credits)
Heavy tailed distributions, grouped/censured data, point and interval estimation, goodness-of-fit, model selection.
MAST 727 Risk Classification (3 credits)
Cluster analysis, principal components, discriminant analysis, Mahalanobis distance, special topics.
MAST 728 Reading Course in Actuarial Mathematics (3 credits)
MAST 729 Selected Topics in Actuarial Mathematics (3 credits)
Applied Mathematics
MAST 680 Topics in Applied Mathematics (3 credits)
MAST 681 Optimization (3 credits)
Introduction to nonsmooth analysis: generalized directional derivative, generalized gradient, nonsmooth calculus; connections with convex analysis. Mathematical programming: optimality conditions; generalized multiplier approach to constraint qualifications and sensitivity analysis. Application of the theory: functions defined as pointwise maxima of a family of functions; minimizing the maximal eigenvalue of a matrix-valued function; variational analysis of an extended eigenvalue problem.
MAST 682 Matrix Analysis (3 credits)
Jordan canonical form and applications, Perron-Frobenius theory of nonnegative matrices with applications to economics and biology, generalizations to matrices which leave a cone invariant.
MAST 683 Numerical Analysis (3 credits)
This course consists of fundamental topics in numerical analysis with a bias towards analytical problems involving optimization integration, differential equations and Fourier transforms. The computer language C++ will be introduced and studied as part of this course; the use of “functional programming” and graphical techniques will be strongly encouraged. By the end of the course, students should have made a good start on the construction of a personal library of tools for exploring and solving mathematical problems numerically.
MAST 684 Quantum Mechanics (3 credits)
The aim of this course is two-fold: (i) to provide an elementary account of the theory of non-relativistic bound systems, and (ii) to give an introduction to some current research in this area, including spectral geometry.
MAST 685 Approximation Theory (3 credits)
MAST 686 Reading Course in Applied Mathematics (3 credits)
MAST 687 Control Theory (3 credits)
Linear algebraic background material, linear differential and control systems, controllability and observability, properties of the attainable set, the maximal principle and time-optimal control.
MAST 688 Stability Theory (3 credits)
MAST 689 Variational Methods (3 credits)
Algebra and Logic
MAST 691 Mathematical Logic (3 credits)
MAST 692 Advanced Algebra I (3 credits)
Field extensions, normality and separability, normal closures, the Galois correspondence, solution of equations by radicals, application of Galois theory, the fundamental theorem of algebra.
MAST 693 Algebraic Number Theory (3 credits)
Dedekind domains; ideal class groups; ramification; discriminant and different; Dirichlet unit theorem; decomposition of primes; local fields; cyclotomic fields.
MAST 694 Group Theory (3 credits)
Introduction to group theory, including the following topics: continuous and locally compact groups, subgroups and associated homogeneous spaces. Haar measures, quasi-invariant measures, group extensions and universal covering groups, unitary representations, Euclidean and Poincaré groups, square integrability of group representations with applications to image processing.
MAST 696 Advanced Algebra II (3 credits)
MAST 697 Reading Course in Algebra (3 credits)
MAST 698 Category Theory (3 credits)
MAST 699 Topics in Algebra (3 credits)
Thesis and Mathematical Literature
MAST 700 Thesis (27 credits)
MAST 701 Project (15 credits)
A student investigates a mathematical topic, prepares a report and gives a seminar presentation under the guidance of a faculty member.
MATH 603 Extended Project (9 credits)
A student investigates a mathematics education topic, prepares a report, and gives a seminar presentation under the guidance of a faculty member.
MATH 613 Topics in Number Theory
Topics are chosen from the area of Number Theory.
Note: The content varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated bythe title of the course.
MATH 616 Linear Algebra
This course is an extension of undergraduate courses in linear algebra, covering a selection of topics in advanced linear algebra (e.g. from the theory of general vector spaces, linear and multilinear algebras, matrix theory, etc.)
MATH 618 Topics in the Application of Mathematics
Topics are chosen from the area of the Application of Mathematics.
Note: The content varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated bythe title of the course.
MATH 621 Geometry
The course offers an insight into Euclidean and Non-Euclidean geometries.
MATH 622 Abstract Algebra
The course looks at objects such as numbers, polynomials, matrices or transformations from an algebraic-structural point of view. The course may aim at proving such “famous impossibilities” as squaring the circle, duplicating the cube, trisecting an angle or solving a polynomial equation of degree 5 or more by radicals.
MATH 624 Topics in Mathematics Education
This course is an overview and critical analysis of theories and technologies of mathematics teaching. Applications of the theories to studying and/or developing teaching situations or tools for specific mathematical topics are examined.
Note: The content varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated bythe title of the course.
MATH 625 Topology
The course develops elements of the theory of topological spaces and their transformations.
MATH 626 Analysis I
The course is an extension of undergraduate courses in mathematical analysis in the real domain (Analysis I, II; Real Analysis; Measure Theory). Students may substitute this course with any of the MAST 660-669 courses in the MA/MSc program.
MATH 627 Analysis II
The course is an extension of undergraduate courses in mathematical analysis in the complex domain (Complex Analysis I, II). Students may substitute this course with any of the MAST 660-669 courses in the MA/MSc program.
MATH 630 Topics in the Psychology of Mathematics Education
This course studies epistemological, cognitive, affective, social and cultural issues involved in mathematics.
Note: The content varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated bythe title of the course.
MATH 633 Applications of Technology in Mathematics Curriculum Development
This course is an overview of the impact of information and communication technology on curricula, textbooks and teaching approaches.
MATH 634 Computer Software and Mathematics Instruction
This course is an overview and critical evaluation of computer software designed for use in mathematics instruction.
MATH 637 Statistics and Probability
This course discusses theoretical and applied aspects of statistics and probability. Students may substitute this course with any of the MAST 670-677 courses in the MA/MSc program.
MATH 639 Topics in Technology in Mathematics Education
This course involves the elaboration, experimentation and critical analysis of individual projects of integration of ICT in mathematics education.
Note: The content varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated bythe title of the course.
MATH 640 Topics in Logic
Topics are chosen from the area of Mathematical Logic.
Note: The content varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated bythe title of the course.
MATH 641 Survey of Research in Mathematics Education
This course is an overview of recent results in mathematics education research.
MATH 642 Research Methods for Mathematics Education
This course is an overview of qualitative and quantitative methods in mathematics education research.
MATH 645 Topics in Mathematics Education Research
This course is an overview of research literature on a chosen topic or issue in mathematics education.
Note: The content varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated bythe title of the course.
MATH 646 Research Internship
Students conduct a pilot study or participate in a research project as a research assistant under the supervision of a senior researcher. The outcome is a written report of the study.
MATH 647 Readings in Mathematics Education II
The course is closely related to project or thesis writing. Its outcome is a section of the literature review chapter, focused on the student’s particular research question.
MATH 648 Topics in the History of Mathematics
Topics are chosen from the area of the History of Mathematics.
Note: The content varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated bythe title of the course.
MATH 649 Heuristics and Problem Solving
This course examines cognitive processes, tools and strategies involved in solving mathematical problems.
MATH 652 Seminar in Mathematics Education
This course is primarily a thesis or project preparation seminar but it is open to students in the Course Option as well. The research related to students’ research projects is presented and critically evaluated.
MATH 654 Thesis (15 credits)
Students are required to demonstrate their ability to carry out original, independent research. The thesis is researched and written under the direction of a supervisor and thesis committee. Upon completion of the thesis, the student is required to defend his/her thesis before the thesis committee.
PHIL 641 Philosophical Foundations of Biology (3 credits)
This course helps students critically engage biology’s philosophical foundations. Topics typically include the nature of scientific reasoning, testing, and evidence in biology; how best to discover, define, and apply biological concepts; and how to structure the aims of biology to fit our diverse and changing societies.
PHIL 643 Selected Topics in Metaphysics
Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course provided that the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. PHIL 643A, PHIL 643B, etc.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a PHIL 640 or PHIL 642 number may not take this course for credit.
PHIL 644 Philosophy of Science
This course provides an analysis of philosophical issues raised by science, such as those concerning scientific evidence, concepts, theories, and explanation; or the intersection with ethical and social problems.
Note: Students who have received credit for PHIL 650 or 657 may not take this course for credit.
PHIL 645 Philosophy of Mathematics
This course investigates some of the central issues and theories in the philosophy of mathematics such as logicism, intuitionism, or formalism. Other topics may include the nature of mathematical truth or the ontology and epistemology of mathematics.
PHIL 646 Philosophy of Language
Students analyse some aspects of the philosophy of language, such as the nature of meaning, the relation between language and thought, or the relation between language and the world.
Note: Students who have received credit for PHIL 651 may not take this course for credit.
PHIL 647 Philosophy of Mind
Students investigate central issues in the philosophy of mind, such as the architecture and modularity of the mind, the mind-body problem and mental causation, or the metaphysics and function of consciousness.
Note: Students who have received credit for PHIL 664 may not take this course for credit.
PHIL 648 Philosophy of Social Science
Students study methods of various social and human sciences and the differences in aims between, for instance, understanding, explaining, experiencing, and being liberated from oppression.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a PHIL 655 number may not take this course for credit.
PHIL 649 Phenomenology
Drawing from classical and recent phenomenlogical philosophy, students study selected central figures such as Husserl, Heidegger, and issues such as meaning, the body, temporality, and phenomenological reduction.
Note: Students who have received credit for PHIL 668 may not take this course for credit.
PHIL 652 Selected Topics in Logic
Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course provided that the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. PHIL 652A, PHIL 652B, etc.
Note: Students who have received credit for PHIL 611 may not take this course for credit.
PHIL 656 Selected Topics in Analytic Philosophy
Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course provided that the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. PHIL 656A, PHIL 656B, etc.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under PHIL 666 may not take this course for credit.
PHIL 658 Selected Topics in Continental Philosophy
Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course provided that the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. PHIL 658A, PHIL 658B, etc.
PHIL 659 Selected Topics in Metaphysics, Epistemology, or Philosophy of Science
Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course provided that the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. PHIL 659A, PHIL 659B, etc.
To be classified each year by the Graduate Program Director:
PHIL 672 Tutorial
PHIL 678 Topics in Current Research
PHIL 698 The Teaching of Philosophy
Research Paper and Thesis
PHIL 693 Research Paper (27 credits)
PHIL 696 Thesis (27 credits)
Cognate Courses
Students may enrol in certain courses in the Departments of Education, Political Science, and Religions and Cultures with permission of the Philosophy Graduate Program Director and the second department involved.
PHYS 861: Doctoral Seminar on Selected Topics I (3 credits), in which the candidates must present a pedagogical talk on a topic from physics to an advanced-level undergraduate student audience.
PHYS 862: Doctoral Seminar on Selected Topics II (3 credits), in which the candidates must present a talk related to their thesis research to a critical audience.
PHYS 870: Comprehensive Examination and Research Proposal (6 credits): The purpose of this course is to satisfy the department that the student is sufficiently prepared, in terms of background and ability, to pursue the research required for a PhD. Each student is required to prepare a written project in his/her field of research. The topic is general, and not part of the thesis work. The oral examination is based on the contents of this report. The Graduate Program Committee appoints an examination committee in consultation with the thesis supervisor. The supervisor is responsible for the subject chosen and also acts as a member of the examining committee for the oral presentation. The comprehensive examination must be completed within four months after the candidate's initial registration in the PhD program. The grade for this course is a Pass or Fail. In case of failure in the first attempt, only one more attempt is allowed to take place.
PHYS 890: Doctoral Research and Thesis (69 credits): A student who has passed the comprehensive examination is admitted to candidacy for the PhD degree. The student is allowed to continue working on a research project under the direction of a faculty member of the department only after passing the comprehensive examination. The research is in areas which reflect the interests of the faculty and the facilities of the department. The thesis must make a distinct and original contribution to knowledge, and be presented in acceptable literary form.
Academic Regulations
Academic Standing. Please refer to the Academic Standing section of the Calendar for a detailed review of the Academic Regulations.
Program Specific Requirements. Students must obtain an assessment grade point average (AGPA) of 3.00 based on a minimum of 6 credits.
Residence. The minimum period of residence is two years (6 terms) of full-time graduate study beyond the master’s degree, or the equivalent in part-time study, or three years (9 terms) of full-time graduate study beyond the bachelor’s degree for those students who are permitted to enrol for doctoral studies without completing a master’s degree.
Time Limit. Please refer to the Academic Regulation page for further details regarding the Time Limit requirements.
Graduation Requirement. In order to graduate, students must have a cumulative GPA of at least 3.00.
Courses
All courses are worth 3 credits each unless otherwise specified. The graduate courses offered by the Department of Physics fall into the following categories:
PHYS 600-609 Topics in Quantum and High Energy Physics
PHYS 630-639 Topics in Condensed Matter Physics
PHYS 640-649 Topics in Theoretical Physics
PHYS 660-669 Topics in Biomedical Physics
PHYS 670-679 Topics in Applied Physics
Topics in Quantum and High Energy Physics (600-609)
PHYS 601 Advanced Quantum Mechanics I (3 credits)
This course reviews the mathematical foundations of quantum mechanics, Heisenberg, Schroedinger, and interaction representations; time-dependent perturbation theory and the golden rule; collision theory, Born approximation, T-matrix and phase shifts; angular momentum theory: eigenvalues and eigenvectors, spherical harmonics, rotations and spin, additions theorems and their applications.
Note: Students who have received credit for PHYS 612 may not take this course for credit.
PHYS 602 Advanced Quantum Mechanics II (3 credits)
The following applications are examined: non-relativistic theory - systems of identical particles, second quantization, Hartree-Fock theory, as well as path integral formulation of quantum mechanics; relativistic theory: Dirac and Klein-Gordon equations, positron theory, propogator theory and their applications; field quantization, radiative effects, Dirac and Majorana spinors, Noether’s theorem.
Note: Students who have received credit for PHYS 613 may not take this course for credit.
PHYS 603 High Energy Physics (3 credits)
This course discusses symmetries and groups; antiparticles; electrodynamics of spinless particles, the Dirac equation and its implications for the electrodynamics of spin 1/2 particles. A general discussion of loops, renormalization and running coupling constants, hadronic structure and partons, is used to introduce the principles of Quantum Chromodynamics and Electroweak Interactions. The course concludes with an exposition of gauge symmetries, the Weinberg-Salam model, and Grand Unification.
Note: Students who have received credit for PHYS 616 may not take this course for credit.
PHYS 609 Selected Topics in Quantum or High Energy Physics (3 credits)
This course reflects the research interests of the physics faculty in quantum or high energy physics and/or those of the graduate students working with them.
Note: Students who have taken the same topic under PHYS 615, PHYS 618 or PHYS 619 may not take this course for credit.
Topics in Condensed Matter Physics (630-639)
PHYS 636 Condensed Matter Physics I (3 credits)
Review of electron levels in periodic potentials, various band-structure methods, Thomas-Fermi and Hartree-Fock theories, screening, anharmonic effects crystals, inhomogeneous semiconductors, p-n junctions, transistors. Dielectric properties of insulators, ferroelectric materials. Defects in crystals. Magnetic ordering, paramagnetism, diamagnetism, ferromagnetism, phase transitions, superconductivity.
PHYS 637 Condensed Matter Physics II (3 credits)
This course provides a review of the phonon modes and electron band structure of crystals. It covers a selection of modern quantum condensed‑matter topics which may include Hartree‑Fock, mesoscopic quantum transport theory (quantum dots, 1D systems, 2D systems), superconductivity, the quantum Hall effects, weak localization, and current research topics. Students further develop an in-depth knowledge of the course material through an individual project.
PHYS 639 Selected Topics in Condensed Matter Physics (3 credits)
This course reflects the research interests of the physics faculty in condensed matter physics and/or those of the graduate students working with them.
Note: Students who have received credit for PHYS 635 may not take this course for credit.
Topics in Theoretical Physics (640-649)
PHYS 642 Statistical Physics (3 credits)
This course covers statistical concepts, probability, Gaussian probability distribution, statistical ensemble, macrostates and microstates, thermodynamic probability, statistical thermodynamics, reversible and irreversible processes, entropy, thermodynamic laws and statistical relations, partition functions, Maxwell’s distribution, phase transformation, Maxwell-Boltzmann, Bose-Einstein and Fermi-Dirac statistics, quantum statistics in the classical limit, black-body radiation, conduction electrons in metals, interacting particle system, lattice vibrations, virial coefficients, Weiss molecular field approximation.
Note: Students who have received credit for PHYS 654 may not take this course for credit.
PHYS 644 Advanced Classical Mechanics and Relativity (3 credits)
This course covers generalized coordinates, Lagrange’s equations, method of Lagrange multipliers, variational formulation, Hamilton’s equations of motion, canonical transformations, Hamilton-Jacobi theory, special theory of relativity, Einstein’s axioms, Lorentz transformations, form invariance and tensors, four-vectors, gravity.
Note: Students who have received credit for PHYS 658 may not take this course for credit.
PHYS 646 Electrodynamics (3 credits)
This course covers the electrostatic boundary-value problem with Green’s function, Maxwell’s equations, energy-momentum tensor, guided waves, dielectric wave-guides, fibre optics, radiation static field, multipole radiation, velocity and acceleration field, Larmor’s formula, relativistic generalization, radiating systems, linear antenna, aperture in wave guide, scattering, Thompson scattering, Bremsstrahlung, Abraham-Lorentz equation, Breit-Wigner formula, Green’s function for Helmholtz’s equation. Noether’s theorem.
PHYS 648 Non Linear Waves (3 credits)
Linear stability analysis and limitations, modulated waves and nonlinear dispersion relations, Korteweg-de Vries, sine-Gordon, and nonlinear Schrödinger equations. Hydro-dynamic, transmission-line, mechanical, lattice, and optical solitions. Applications in optical fibres, Josephson junction arrays. Inverse scattering method, conservation laws.
PHYS 649 Selected Topics in Theoretical Physics (3 credits)
This course reflects the research interests of the Physics faculty in theoretical physics and/or those of the graduate students working with them.
Topics in Biomedical Physics (660-669)
PHYS 660 Chemical Aspects of Biophysics (3 credits)
This course examines several aspects of the stability of protein structures including bonding and nonbonding interactions, energy profiles, Ramachandran plot, stabilization through protonation-deprotonation, interaction of macromolecules with solvents, the thermodynamics of protein folding, and ligand binding. The Marcus-theory of biological electron transfer is discussed. The course also introduces the students to several modern biophysical techniques such as electronic spectroscopies (absorption, fluorescence), X-ray absorption spectroscopy, NMR and EPR spectroscopy, IR and Raman spectroscopy, circular dichroism, and differential scanning calorimetry. Students further develop an in-depth knowledge of the course material through an individual project.
PHYS 663 Quantitative Human Systems Physiology (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Open to all Science and Engineering program students.
This course addresses important concepts of quantitative systems physiology and the physical bases of physiological function in different organ systems. The student becomes familiar with the structure and functional principles of the main physiological systems, and how to quantify them. These include the nervous, cardiovascular, respiratory and muscular systems. Important biophysical principles and quantitative physiological methods are presented. Topics may include the biophysics of muscle contractions, fluid dynamics in the cardiovascular system, respiration gas exchange and neuronal communication, and how the biophysics of neuronal communications can be used to image brain activity. Students develop in-depth knowledge of how to apply these principles to a specific system through an individual project.
PHYS 665 Principles of Medical Imaging (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Open to all Science and Engineering program students.
This course aims to introduce the physical principles associated with important medical imaging techniques used in medicine and in neuroscience research. The objective is to cover the whole imaging process in detail starting from the body entities to be imaged (e.g. structure, function, blood flow, neuronal activity), to the physical principles of data acquisition and finally the methods used for image data reconstruction. Important imaging modalities such as X-ray and computer tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, nuclear medicine, ultrasound, electrophysiology and optical imaging techniques are presented. Students develop an in-depth understanding of how to apply this knowledge for a specific imaging modality through an individual project.
Topics in Applied Physics (670 - 679)
PHYS 679 Selected Topics in Applied Physics (3 credits)
This course reflects the research interests of the Physics faculty in Applied Physics and/or those of the graduate students working with them.
Seminar, Thesis, and Comprehensive Examination
PHYS 861 Doctoral Seminar on Selected Topics I (3 credits)
Students must present one pedagogical seminar on a topic from physics to an advanced-level undergraduate student audience. This course is evaluated on a pass/fail basis. No substitution is permitted.
PHYS 862 Doctoral Seminar on Selected Topics II (3 credits)
Students must present one seminar in their current research area to a critical audience. In addition, students are required to attend and participate in all departmental seminars. This course is evaluated on a pass/fail basis. No substitution is permitted.
PHYS 870 Comprehensive Examination and Research Proposal (6 credits)
PHYS 890 Doctoral Research and Thesis (69 credits)
Note: Students admitted prior to 1997-98 should register for PHYS 850 (70 credits). Students admitted after summer 1997 will register for PHYS 850 (66 credits).
PHYS 760: MSc Seminar on Selected Topics (3 credits). Students must give one seminar in the field of their research.
PHYS 790: Master’s Research and Thesis (33 credits): The thesis must represent the results of the student's original research work undertaken after admission to this program. Work previously published by the student may be used only as introductory or background subject matter. The thesis is examined by a departmental committee. An oral examination is conducted to test the candidate's ability to defend the thesis.
The thesis may be based on a study of a significant problem in physics or a research project conducted as part of the student’s employment. Permission to submit a thesis in the latter category is granted in the event that:
the student’s employer furnishes written approval for the pursuit and reporting of the project;
the student has research facilities which, in the opinion of the physics graduate studies committee, are adequate;
arrangements can be made for supervision of the project by a faculty member of the Department of Physics;
in all but exceptional cases, the student has direct supervision by a qualified supervisor at the site of the student’s employment. The supervisor must be approved by the physics graduate studies committee. A written working agreement between the supervisor and the university are required;
the proposed topic for the thesis, together with a brief statement outlining the proposed method of treatment, is approved by the physics graduate studies committee.
Academic Regulations
Academic Standing. Please refer to the Academic Standing section of the Calendar for a detailed review of the Academic Regulations.
Residence. The minimum residence requirement is one year (3 terms) of full-time study, or the equivalent in part-time study.
Time Limit. Please refer to the Academic Regulation page for further details regarding the Time Limit requirements.
Graduation Requirement. In order to graduate, students must have a cumulative GPA of at least 2.70.
Courses
All courses are worth 3 credits each unless otherwise specified. The graduate courses offered by the Department of Physics fall into the following categories:
PHYS 600-609 Topics in Quantum and High Energy Physics
PHYS 630-639 Topics in Condensed Matter Physics
PHYS 640-649 Topics in Theoretical Physics
PHYS 660-669 Topics in Biomedical Physics
PHYS 670-679 Topics in Applied Physics
Topics in Quantum and High Energy Physics (600-609)
PHYS 601 Advanced Quantum Mechanics I (3 credits)
This course reviews the mathematical foundations of quantum mechanics, Heisenberg, Schroedinger, and interaction representations; time-dependent perturbation theory and the golden rule; collision theory, Born approximation, T-matrix and phase shifts; angular momentum theory: eigenvalues and eigenvectors, spherical harmonics, rotations and spin, additions theorems and their applications.
Note: Students who have received credit for PHYS 612 may not take this course for credit.
PHYS 602 Advanced Quantum Mechanics II (3 credits)
The following applications are examined: non-relativistic theory - systems of identical particles, second quantization, Hartree-Fock theory, as well as path integral formulation of quantum mechanics; relativistic theory: Dirac and Klein-Gordon equations, positron theory, propogator theory and their applications; field quantization, radiative effects, Dirac and Majorana spinors, Noether’s theorem.
Note: Students who have received credit for PHYS 613 may not take this course for credit.
PHYS 603 High Energy Physics (3 credits)
This course discusses symmetries and groups; antiparticles; electrodynamics of spinless particles, the Dirac equation and its implications for the electrodynamics of spin 1/2 particles. A general discussion of loops, renormalization and running coupling constants, hadronic structure and partons, is used to introduce the principles of Quantum Chromodynamics and Electroweak Interactions. The course concludes with an exposition of gauge symmetries, the Weinberg-Salam model, and Grand Unification.
Note: Students who have received credit for PHYS 616 may not take this course for credit.
PHYS 609 Selected Topics in Quantum or High Energy Physics (3 credits)
This course reflects the research interests of the physics faculty in quantum or high energy physics and/or those of the graduate students working with them.
Note: Students who have taken the same topic under PHYS 615, PHYS 618 or PHYS 619 may not take this course for credit.
Topics in Condensed Matter Physics (630-639)
PHYS 636 Condensed Matter Physics I (3 credits)
Review of electron levels in periodic potentials, various band-structure methods, Thomas-Fermi and Hartree-Fock theories, screening, anharmonic effects crystals, inhomogeneous semiconductors, p-n junctions, transistors. Dielectric properties of insulators, ferroelectric materials. Defects in crystals. Magnetic ordering, paramagnetism, diamagnetism, ferromagnetism, phase transitions, superconductivity.
PHYS 637 Condensed Matter Physics II (3 credits)
This course provides a review of the phonon modes and electron band structure of crystals. It covers a selection of modern quantum condensed‑matter topics which may include Hartree‑Fock, mesoscopic quantum transport theory (quantum dots, 1D systems, 2D systems), superconductivity, the quantum Hall effects, weak localization, and current research topics. Students further develop an in-depth knowledge of the course material through an individual project.
PHYS 639 Selected Topics in Condensed Matter Physics (3 credits)
This course reflects the research interests of the physics faculty in condensed matter physics and/or those of the graduate students working with them.
Note: Students who have received credit for PHYS 635 may not take this course for credit.
Topics in Theoretical Physics (640-649)
PHYS 642 Statistical Physics (3 credits)
This course covers statistical concepts, probability, Gaussian probability distribution, statistical ensemble, macrostates and microstates, thermodynamic probability, statistical thermodynamics, reversible and irreversible processes, entropy, thermodynamic laws and statistical relations, partition functions, Maxwell’s distribution, phase transformation, Maxwell-Boltzmann, Bose-Einstein and Fermi-Dirac statistics, quantum statistics in the classical limit, black-body radiation, conduction electrons in metals, interacting particle system, lattice vibrations, virial coefficients, Weiss molecular field approximation.
Note: Students who have received credit for PHYS 654 may not take this course for credit.
PHYS 644 Advanced Classical Mechanics and Relativity (3 credits)
This course covers generalized coordinates, Lagrange’s equations, method of Lagrange multipliers, variational formulation, Hamilton’s equations of motion, canonical transformations, Hamilton-Jacobi theory, special theory of relativity, Einstein’s axioms, Lorentz transformations, form invariance and tensors, four-vectors, gravity.
Note: Students who have received credit for PHYS 658 may not take this course for credit.
PHYS 646 Electrodynamics (3 credits)
This course covers the electrostatic boundary-value problem with Green’s function, Maxwell’s equations, energy-momentum tensor, guided waves, dielectric wave-guides, fibre optics, radiation static field, multipole radiation, velocity and acceleration field, Larmor’s formula, relativistic generalization, radiating systems, linear antenna, aperture in wave guide, scattering, Thompson scattering, Bremsstrahlung, Abraham-Lorentz equation, Breit-Wigner formula, Green’s function for Helmholtz’s equation. Noether’s theorem.
PHYS 648 Non Linear Waves (3 credits)
Linear stability analysis and limitations, modulated waves and nonlinear dispersion relations, Korteweg-de Vries, sine-Gordon, and nonlinear Schrödinger equations. Hydro-dynamic, transmission-line, mechanical, lattice, and optical solitions. Applications in optical fibres, Josephson junction arrays. Inverse scattering method, conservation laws.
PHYS 649 Selected Topics in Theoretical Physics (3 credits)
This course reflects the research interests of the Physics faculty in theoretical physics and/or those of the graduate students working with them.
Topics in Biomedical Physics (660-669)
PHYS 660 Chemical Aspects of Biophysics (3 credits)
This course examines several aspects of the stability of protein structures including bonding and nonbonding interactions, energy profiles, Ramachandran plot, stabilization through protonation-deprotonation, interaction of macromolecules with solvents, the thermodynamics of protein folding, and ligand binding. The Marcus-theory of biological electron transfer is discussed. The course also introduces the students to several modern biophysical techniques such as electronic spectroscopies (absorption, fluorescence), X-ray absorption spectroscopy, NMR and EPR spectroscopy, IR and Raman spectroscopy, circular dichroism, and differential scanning calorimetry. Students further develop an in-depth knowledge of the course material through an individual project.
PHYS 663 Quantitative Human Systems Physiology (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Open to all Science and Engineering program students.
This course addresses important concepts of quantitative systems physiology and the physical bases of physiological function in different organ systems. The student becomes familiar with the structure and functional principles of the main physiological systems, and how to quantify them. These include the nervous, cardiovascular, respiratory and muscular systems. Important biophysical principles and quantitative physiological methods are presented. Topics may include the biophysics of muscle contractions, fluid dynamics in the cardiovascular system, respiration gas exchange and neuronal communication, and how the biophysics of neuronal communications can be used to image brain activity. Students develop in-depth knowledge of how to apply these principles to a specific system through an individual project.
PHYS 665 Principles of Medical Imaging (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Open to all Science and Engineering program students.
This course aims to introduce the physical principles associated with important medical imaging techniques used in medicine and in neuroscience research. The objective is to cover the whole imaging process in detail starting from the body entities to be imaged (e.g. structure, function, blood flow, neuronal activity), to the physical principles of data acquisition and finally the methods used for image data reconstruction. Important imaging modalities such as X-ray and computer tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, nuclear medicine, ultrasound, electrophysiology and optical imaging techniques are presented. Students develop an in-depth understanding of how to apply this knowledge for a specific imaging modality through an individual project.
Topics in Applied Physics (670 - 679)
PHYS 679 Selected Topics in Applied Physics (3 credits)
This course reflects the research interests of the Physics faculty in Applied Physics and/or those of the graduate students working with them.
Seminar, Thesis, and Comprehensive Examination
PHYS 760 MSc Seminar on Selected Topics (3 credits)
Students must give one seminar in the field of their research. In addition, full time students must participate in all seminars given in the department, and part time students must attend, during their studies, the same number of seminars that are normally given during the minimum residence requirement for full time students. The course in evaluated on a pass/fail basis. No substitution is permitted.
PHYS 790 Master’s Research and Thesis (33 credits)
POLI 801 Advanced Seminar in Comparative Politics (3 credits)
This course is a survey of the field of comparative politics at an advanced level. It examines major theories, concepts and methods of comparative political analysis.
POLI 802 Advanced Seminar in International Politics (3 credits)
This course is a survey of core concepts of international politics at an advanced level. It examines major theoretical perspectives and their application to historical and contemporary international issues.
POLI 803 Advanced Seminar in Canadian and Québec Politics (3 credits)
This course is a survey of the field at an advanced level. It presents a discussion of contemporary issues and controversies in Canadian and Québec politics.
POLI 804 Advanced Seminar in Political Theory (3 credits)
This course is a survey of leading research in political theory and political philosophy, including the history of political thought, normative political theory and contemporary political thought.
POLI 805 Advanced Seminar in Public Policy and Public Administration (3 credits)
This course surveys several theoretical models and paradigms of public policy and public administration. It examines critically the intellectual and ideological traditions of policy analysis.
POLI 844 Research Design (3 credits)
This course explores differing research philosophies, the principles of research design and research strategies. It also considers philosophical critiques of different approaches and practical aspects of conducting research.
Elective Courses
POLI 811 Special Topics in Comparative Politics (3 credits)
Topics vary from year to year.
POLI 812 Special Topics in International Politics (3 credits)
Topics vary from year to year.
POLI 813 Special Topics in Canadian and Québec Politics (3 credits)
Topics vary from year to year.
POLI 814 Special Topics in Political Theory (3 credits)
Topics vary from year to year.
POLI 815 Special Topics in Public Policy and Public Administration (3 credits)
Topics vary from year to year.
POLI 898 Directed Studies (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the PhD Committee.
This special reading course is designed to explore topics and themes relevant to a student’s doctoral research.
Comprehensive Exams
POLI 885 Comprehensive Exam (6 credits)
POLI 886 Comprehensive Exam (6 credits)
Thesis
POLI 889 Thesis Proposal (3 credits)
POLI 890 Thesis (54 credits)
POLI 694 Thesis Proposal (3 credits)
POLI 696 Master’s Thesis (24 credits)
Course Descriptions
All courses listed are one-term, 3-credit courses unless otherwise indicated. Some courses are offered in French.
Political Science
POLI 600 Public Policy and the Governmental Process in Canada
The course is designed to familiarize students with the structures and processes of policy-making in Canadian government. Particular attention is given to theories of public policy, the role of key institutions and agencies in the formulation and analysis of policy, and recent organizational developments in the executive-bureaucratic arena.
POLI 601 Research Design
This course explores differing research philosophies, the principles of research design and research strategies. It also considers philosophical critiques of different approaches and practical aspects of conducting research.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 685 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 603 International Relations Theory
This course explores the major theories, approaches and contemporary debates within international relations theory. Topics include the development of realism, liberalism, constructivism and critical approaches. Major aspects of international relations theory, such as security, political economy, and international organization, are also explored.
POLI 604 Comparative Public Policy
This course analyses policy development in industrialized countries. It focuses on various areas such as economic, education, fiscal and social policies. Moreover, this course examines contributions that address methodological issues related to comparative research.
POLI 605 Environmental Policy and Governance
Students in this seminar course conduct a theoretical and empirical survey of contemporary approaches to environmental policy development and implementation at various levels of governance, including municipal, national and international. Case studies may include toxic waste, oceans management, the impact of trade agreements, biodiversity conservation, and climate change.
POLI 606 Policy Making and the National Purpose in Canada
This course focuses upon the American challenge to Canadian independence in the economic, cultural, defence and other spheres, and examines policy initiatives taken by Canadian governments and the various proposals advanced by nationalist groups to meet this challenge.
POLI 607 Ageing and Public Policy
Substantial improvement in health, hygiene and working conditions combined with declining fertility rate is creating an important demographic shift. As a result, the number of individuals aged 65 and above is expected to double by 2031. This has multiple policy and political consequences across industrialized countries. The object of this course is to analyze this demographic shift from a comparative perspective.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 681 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 608 Globalization and Regional Integration
A study of the long range historical tendencies towards large and complex interdependent organizations in the post industrial world. These trends juxtapose the regional confederation of the European community as well as the rising trade blocs of North America and the Pacific, with the development of a single political economic and cultural super-system of global scope.
POLI 610 Economic Policy After Keynes
This course introduces students to the controversy surrounding the economics of Keynes and the implications of his work for the current problems of unemployment and growth. Interpretations of Keynes are explored in the context of the current eclipse of Keynesianism in public policy circles.
POLI 611 Judicial Politics and Policy
This course considers the increased policy-making functions of Supreme Courts in systems that have statutory and entrenched bills of rights. By focusing on the interaction between courts and legislatures, and the increasing use of litigation strategies by interest groups, the implications of public policy in a rights context are examined.
POLI 612 Public Policy and Business Cycles
This course explores the public policy of managing the business cycle. The emphasis is on both the theoretical literature associated with modern notions of managing the economic cycle and on applied case studies. The focus is both Canadian and comparative.
POLI 613 Political Socialization: A Comparative Perspective
The course presents an overview of the central concepts and theories used in political socialization research. Students learn about the major sources of political opinions, attitudes and values. This course also investigates how political socialization is used in practice in Canadian politics and within several other sub-disciplines of political science.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 683 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 614 Political Economy of Advanced Industrial Nations
The course provides an overview of the scholarly debate and research on political economy issues considered central to an examination of the political economy of advanced countries.
POLI 615 The Politics of Citizenship in Canada
This course examines key debates in the study and practice of citizenship in Canada. It explores the different forces which are transforming our understanding of citizenship, including globalization, nationalism, welfare state reform, international migration, and multiculturalism. Topics include citizenship and social exclusion; social rights and the welfare state; and economic citizenship, employment and social identity.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under POLI 685J may not take this course for credit.
POLI 616 Theories of Foreign Policy
This course explores the major international and domestic determinants of foreign policy. Principal topics include the influence of the international system, geography, leadership, regime-type, transnationalism and non-governmental organizations on foreign policy. Rather than focusing on any particular country, the course draws upon the experiences of a variety of Western democratic states utilizing case studies of American, British, French and Canadian foreign policy to illustrate and evaluate course themes.
POLI 617 Knowledge in International Relations
This course examines the creation and use of expertise in policy-making, including questions of knowledge construction, the sway of science versus norms on decision-makers, and the impact of bureaucratic processes on the quality of policy. Alternative conceptions of knowledge and its effects on decision-making from political science, sociology, economics, and psychology are applied to issues including national security, environmental politics and economics.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 687 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 618 Canadian Public Administration
Discussion is directed towards an understanding of public administration in the Canadian federal setting. Some of the main problems of public administration are related to important changes which have taken place over the last twenty years and which are continuing to take place.
POLI 619 International Peacekeeping
This course is a seminar on the theory and practice of multinational peace and stability operations. The course covers theoretical perspectives on peace operations; the origins and evolution of peace operations, with particular focus on the expansion and transformation of peace operations since the end of the Cold War; the organizational and international politics of peace operations; causes of peace operations’ success and failure; problems of managing and coordinating actors involved in peace operations; and prospects for organizational learning and reform. The course examines specific cases of peacekeeping, peacebuilding and peace enforcement.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 687 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 621 Political Leadership and Decision Making
This course considers the ways political actors attempt policy and institutional changes through an examination of leadership skills and decision making styles. It considers the philosophical treatments by Plato and Machiavelli and the relationship between morality and leadership by analyzing modern leadership within a constrained constitutional context.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under POLI 687M may not take this course for credit.
POLI 622 Comparative Public Administration
A comparative study of the public administration systems in various western countries with emphasis on a comparison vis-à-vis the Canadian federal system.
POLI 623 Ethics, Morality and Justice
This course focuses on the essential political concepts of ethics, justice and morality which underlie and motivate almost all political activity. The course explores both ancient and contemporary perspectives on the meaning of these concepts and examines the problems and theoretical challenges that arise when a definitive notion of justice is used to assess or generate public policy.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 685 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 624 Public Administration of Intergovernmental Affairs
This course deals with intergovernmental affairs that have become a significant part of the policy process in many countries. An analysis of power relations in the federal state, both in institutional and societal terms, will be a primary focus of this course. The Canadian case will serve as the main area of inquiry.
POLI 625 Policy Discourse of Biotechnology
This course examines the philosophical, political, and theoretical counsel to policymakers and broader public discourse surrounding the development and implementation of new laws and regulations pertaining to issues in advanced biotechnology, such as cloning, stem cell research, and psychopharmacology.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 685 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 626 Seminar in Comparative Politics
This course is a survey of the field of comparative politics. It examines major theories, concepts and methods of comparative political analysis.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 681 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 628 Ethics and Values in Public Policy Making
This course provokes critical thinking on value judgements underlying policy-making and familiarizes students with practical measures available for promoting integrity in public institutions. Students examine the principles underlying ethical standards, various professional codes of ethics, issues such as potential conflicts between personal convictions and public duties, and the ethical responsibility of public officials and civil servants in democratic societies.
POLI 629 Critical Perspectives in Development
This course examines key debates surrounding the concept and the politics of development in the ‘less developed’ world with a particular emphasis on institutional structures, such as the state, the market and non-governmental organizations, through which development has been pursued.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under POLI 687K may not take this course for credit.
POLI 630 0rganization Theory
This is a seminar in organization theory, an interdisciplinary field concerned with the sources, determinants, functions, and effects of complex organizations. The course focuses on political organizations and the political effects of organizations by reviewing the historical development of organization theory and considering how current debates help us understand the nature and functions of organizations in the twenty-first century. Topics include the nature and sources of formal organizations; organizational structure; organizational decision-making; organizational culture; organizational reliability and failure; and the interaction between organizations and their environments.
POLI 631 Political Texts
The course is an intensive study of a text by a major author such as Plato, Machiavelli, Hobbes, or Nietzsche. Students systematically explore the issues and problems raised by the text and the interpretive traditions that follow from it.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 685 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 632 Seminar in Political Theory
This course is a survey of leading research in and approaches to political theory and political philosophy, including the history of political thought, normative political theory and contemporary political thought.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 685 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 634 Policy Analysis and Program Evaluation
This course focuses upon methods of assessing consequences of public policies. The main purpose of the course is to allow students to survey evaluation research in political science and to present research designs that will enable them to make plausible assumptions about the outcome of governmental programs in the absence of experimental control.
POLI 635 Biotechnology, Agriculture and Food Policy
The purpose of this course is to explore the ethical and policy dilemmas that rapid scientific and technological advances in biotechnology pose for issues of agriculture and food security. The course focuses on Canadian policy within a comparative perspective and examines alternative policy responses, such as found in the US, EU and developing countries.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 685 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 636 Theories of Public Policy and Public Administration
The course explores the diverse intellectual and ideological origins of Public Administration and Public Policy. The focus is on the comparative and critical analysis of the theoretical models under study. Students are encouraged to think analytically and to apply theoretical frameworks to their own empirical enquiries.
POLI 637 Democracy and Regime Change
This seminar examines the various definitions and understandings of democratic and authoritarian regimes and the principal moments of regime change (breakdown, transition, post-transition, and consolidation). It focuses on institution-building, the actors involved in the process of regime change and the political economy of transitions.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under POLI 687B may not take this course for credit.
POLI 638 Seminar in Canadian and Quebec Politics
This course is a survey of the field at an advanced level. It presents a discussion of contemporary issues and controversies in Canadian and Quebec Politics.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 683 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 643 Rational and Public Choice
This course deals with understanding the micro-analytical foundations of individual and group behaviour in political life. It introduces students to the main concepts, theorems and their applications in positive analytical politics including game theory, spatial modeling and institutional analysis.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under POLI 687C may not take this course for credit.
POLI 644 Research Methods
This course introduces students to the logic and methodology of Political Science research and public policy analysis.
POLI 645 Indigenous Peoples and the State
This course examines the political and administrative context in which Indigenous Peoples and the state coexist as well as the tensions between European and Indigenous modes of governance. It focuses on the evolution of institutions and policies regulating this relationship, and the governance strategies developed consistent with Indigenous traditions. The Canadian case serves as the focus but other countries may be considered.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under POLI 683M may not take this course for credit.
POLI 646 History of Thought in Political Economy
This course presents a survey of the major ideas which have shaped the various approaches to political economy from the classical theorists to twentieth century thinkers. The historical and contemporary influence of these ideas on public policy is evaluated.
POLI 647 International Human Security
An introduction to the growing literature and controversies surrounding the concept of ‘human security’ in international politics, applied specifically to the Canadian foreign policy context. Examined actors include states, non-governmental organizations, international institutions, and ‘civil society’.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under POLI 687O may not take this course for credit.
POLI 648 Feminist Critiques of Public Policy
This course provides an in-depth examination of feminist and critical perspectives of public policy and administration. The course seeks to examine the ways in which social location is implicated in (and mediated by) public policy theory and practice. Specific topics may include the state of bureaucracy, state-society relations, public policy discourses, structures, processes and outcomes, and substantive issue areas, such as body politics, social and economic policy, and the labour market.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 683 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 649 Gender and Global Politics
This seminar focuses on the intersection of the global and the local through different methodological and theoretical approaches to the study of gender. Drawing from texts from the fields of comparative politics, international relations and sociology, the course exposes class participants to different scholarly treatments of gender and politics especially as these treatments have evolved in a post-Cold War era of increasing globalization.
POLI 652 Science, Technology and Power
This course introduces students to the growing field of science policy analysis. It provides an overview of the theoretical approaches and analytical tools used in the area and critically discusses various policy mechanisms now in place as well as current and emerging issues.
POLI 654 Concepts of the State
This course examines several of the most significant attempts made by modern political thinkers to answer the question, “What is the modern state?” It addresses both the historical emergence of the modern state and the various ways that this emergence has been theorized. Special emphasis is placed on the differences and interconnections between historical, theoretical, and practical questions.
POLI 657 Nationalism and Ethnicity
This seminar discusses the nature, dynamics and consequences of nationalism. The emphasis is placed on presenting and discussing various theoretical understandings of identity and nationalist mobilization. It examines conceptual issues relating to the study of nationalism, namely the nature, origins and characterizations of nations and nationalism and the strategies for regulation of nationalist conflict.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under POLI 687H may not take this course for credit.
POLI 658 Authors of the Political Imagination
This course examines a broad range of literary and non-literary genres for their potential to inform and redirect the political imagination. The seminar adopts a broadly comparative perspective on literature, culture, politics and individual motivation.
POLI 659 International Organizations
This course explores the role of international organizations, institutions and regimes in world politics. The course covers intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations as well as informal institutional arrangements. It surveys theoretical debates regarding the origins, dynamics, and significance of international organizations, and examines their role in areas such as international security, international political economy, and regional integration. The course also considers debates over democratic accountability within international organizations and the efficacy of global governance.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 687 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 662 International Political Economy
This course covers theories from macroeconomics and international relations and their application to major historical and contemporary events in the evolution of the global political economy. Topics include international trade and finance, economic development,regional integration and globalization, North-South relations, the emergence of multinational corporations, and international organizations such as the World Bank, IMF, WTO, OECD, and UNCTAD.
POLI 681 Special Topics in Comparative Politics
POLI 683 Special Topics in Public Policy and Administration
POLI 684 Special Topics in Canadian and Quebec Politics
POLI 685 Special Topics in Political Theory
POLI 687 Special Topics in International Politics
POLI 694 Thesis Proposal (3 credits)
This course is a directed study involving a comprehensive understanding of the literature in the area of research directly relevant to the thesis topic under the direction of a faculty supervisor. The written assignments involve a comprehensive literature review, annotated bibliography and research design that culminate in a thesis proposal presented in an oral defence before the thesis supervisor and two faculty members in the graduate program.
POLI 695 Directed Studies
Independent study in the area of concentration.
POLI 696 Master’s Thesis (24 credits)
Students are required to demonstrate their ability to carry out original, independent research. The thesis, which is researched and written under the direction of a supervisor and thesis committee, is defended before the student’s thesis committee.
Cognate Courses
Students may enrol in cognate courses in the John Molson School of Business and in the Departments of Communication Studies, Economics, Education, and Sociology and Anthropology in the Faculty of Arts and Science. Permission of the Graduate Program Directors of both the Master of/Magisteriate in Arts (Public Policy and Public Administration) and the second department is required.
POLI 601 Research Design (3 credits)
POLI 691 Extended Research Essay (12 credits)
POLI 693 Internship with Research Paper (21 credits)
Course Descriptions
All courses listed are one-term, 3-credit courses unless otherwise indicated. Some courses are offered in French.
Political Science
POLI 600 Public Policy and the Governmental Process in Canada
The course is designed to familiarize students with the structures and processes of policy-making in Canadian government. Particular attention is given to theories of public policy, the role of key institutions and agencies in the formulation and analysis of policy, and recent organizational developments in the executive-bureaucratic arena.
POLI 601 Research Design
This course explores differing research philosophies, the principles of research design and research strategies. It also considers philosophical critiques of different approaches and practical aspects of conducting research.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 685 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 603 International Relations Theory
This course explores the major theories, approaches and contemporary debates within international relations theory. Topics include the development of realism, liberalism, constructivism and critical approaches. Major aspects of international relations theory, such as security, political economy, and international organization, are also explored.
POLI 604 Comparative Public Policy
This course analyses policy development in industrialized countries. It focuses on various areas such as economic, education, fiscal and social policies. Moreover, this course examines contributions that address methodological issues related to comparative research.
POLI 605 Environmental Policy and Governance
Students in this seminar course conduct a theoretical and empirical survey of contemporary approaches to environmental policy development and implementation at various levels of governance, including municipal, national and international. Case studies may include toxic waste, oceans management, the impact of trade agreements, biodiversity conservation, and climate change.
POLI 606 Policy Making and the National Purpose in Canada
This course focuses upon the American challenge to Canadian independence in the economic, cultural, defence and other spheres, and examines policy initiatives taken by Canadian governments and the various proposals advanced by nationalist groups to meet this challenge.
POLI 607 Ageing and Public Policy
Substantial improvement in health, hygiene and working conditions combined with declining fertility rate is creating an important demographic shift. As a result, the number of individuals aged 65 and above is expected to double by 2031. This has multiple policy and political consequences across industrialized countries. The object of this course is to analyze this demographic shift from a comparative perspective.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 681 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 608 Globalization and Regional Integration
A study of the long range historical tendencies towards large and complex interdependent organizations in the post industrial world. These trends juxtapose the regional confederation of the European community as well as the rising trade blocs of North America and the Pacific, with the development of a single political economic and cultural super-system of global scope.
POLI 610 Economic Policy After Keynes
This course introduces students to the controversy surrounding the economics of Keynes and the implications of his work for the current problems of unemployment and growth. Interpretations of Keynes are explored in the context of the current eclipse of Keynesianism in public policy circles.
POLI 611 Judicial Politics and Policy
This course considers the increased policy-making functions of Supreme Courts in systems that have statutory and entrenched bills of rights. By focusing on the interaction between courts and legislatures, and the increasing use of litigation strategies by interest groups, the implications of public policy in a rights context are examined.
POLI 612 Public Policy and Business Cycles
This course explores the public policy of managing the business cycle. The emphasis is on both the theoretical literature associated with modern notions of managing the economic cycle and on applied case studies. The focus is both Canadian and comparative.
POLI 613 Political Socialization: A Comparative Perspective
The course presents an overview of the central concepts and theories used in political socialization research. Students learn about the major sources of political opinions, attitudes and values. This course also investigates how political socialization is used in practice in Canadian politics and within several other sub-disciplines of political science.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 683 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 614 Political Economy of Advanced Industrial Nations
The course provides an overview of the scholarly debate and research on political economy issues considered central to an examination of the political economy of advanced countries.
POLI 615 The Politics of Citizenship in Canada
This course examines key debates in the study and practice of citizenship in Canada. It explores the different forces which are transforming our understanding of citizenship, including globalization, nationalism, welfare state reform, international migration, and multiculturalism. Topics include citizenship and social exclusion; social rights and the welfare state; and economic citizenship, employment and social identity.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under POLI 685J may not take this course for credit.
POLI 616 Theories of Foreign Policy
This course explores the major international and domestic determinants of foreign policy. Principal topics include the influence of the international system, geography, leadership, regime-type, transnationalism and non-governmental organizations on foreign policy. Rather than focusing on any particular country, the course draws upon the experiences of a variety of Western democratic states utilizing case studies of American, British, French and Canadian foreign policy to illustrate and evaluate course themes.
POLI 617 Knowledge in International Relations
This course examines the creation and use of expertise in policy-making, including questions of knowledge construction, the sway of science versus norms on decision-makers, and the impact of bureaucratic processes on the quality of policy. Alternative conceptions of knowledge and its effects on decision-making from political science, sociology, economics, and psychology are applied to issues including national security, environmental politics and economics.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 687 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 618 Canadian Public Administration
Discussion is directed towards an understanding of public administration in the Canadian federal setting. Some of the main problems of public administration are related to important changes which have taken place over the last twenty years and which are continuing to take place.
POLI 619 International Peacekeeping
This course is a seminar on the theory and practice of multinational peace and stability operations. The course covers theoretical perspectives on peace operations; the origins and evolution of peace operations, with particular focus on the expansion and transformation of peace operations since the end of the Cold War; the organizational and international politics of peace operations; causes of peace operations’ success and failure; problems of managing and coordinating actors involved in peace operations; and prospects for organizational learning and reform. The course examines specific cases of peacekeeping, peacebuilding and peace enforcement.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 687 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 621 Political Leadership and Decision Making
This course considers the ways political actors attempt policy and institutional changes through an examination of leadership skills and decision making styles. It considers the philosophical treatments by Plato and Machiavelli and the relationship between morality and leadership by analyzing modern leadership within a constrained constitutional context.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under POLI 687M may not take this course for credit.
POLI 622 Comparative Public Administration
A comparative study of the public administration systems in various western countries with emphasis on a comparison vis-à-vis the Canadian federal system.
POLI 623 Ethics, Morality and Justice
This course focuses on the essential political concepts of ethics, justice and morality which underlie and motivate almost all political activity. The course explores both ancient and contemporary perspectives on the meaning of these concepts and examines the problems and theoretical challenges that arise when a definitive notion of justice is used to assess or generate public policy.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 685 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 624 Public Administration of Intergovernmental Affairs
This course deals with intergovernmental affairs that have become a significant part of the policy process in many countries. An analysis of power relations in the federal state, both in institutional and societal terms, will be a primary focus of this course. The Canadian case will serve as the main area of inquiry.
POLI 625 Policy Discourse of Biotechnology
This course examines the philosophical, political, and theoretical counsel to policymakers and broader public discourse surrounding the development and implementation of new laws and regulations pertaining to issues in advanced biotechnology, such as cloning, stem cell research, and psychopharmacology.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 685 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 626 Seminar in Comparative Politics
This course is a survey of the field of comparative politics. It examines major theories, concepts and methods of comparative political analysis.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 681 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 628 Ethics and Values in Public Policy Making
This course provokes critical thinking on value judgements underlying policy-making and familiarizes students with practical measures available for promoting integrity in public institutions. Students examine the principles underlying ethical standards, various professional codes of ethics, issues such as potential conflicts between personal convictions and public duties, and the ethical responsibility of public officials and civil servants in democratic societies.
POLI 629 Critical Perspectives in Development
This course examines key debates surrounding the concept and the politics of development in the ‘less developed’ world with a particular emphasis on institutional structures, such as the state, the market and non-governmental organizations, through which development has been pursued.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under POLI 687K may not take this course for credit.
POLI 630 0rganization Theory
This is a seminar in organization theory, an interdisciplinary field concerned with the sources, determinants, functions, and effects of complex organizations. The course focuses on political organizations and the political effects of organizations by reviewing the historical development of organization theory and considering how current debates help us understand the nature and functions of organizations in the twenty-first century. Topics include the nature and sources of formal organizations; organizational structure; organizational decision-making; organizational culture; organizational reliability and failure; and the interaction between organizations and their environments.
POLI 631 Political Texts
The course is an intensive study of a text by a major author such as Plato, Machiavelli, Hobbes, or Nietzsche. Students systematically explore the issues and problems raised by the text and the interpretive traditions that follow from it.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 685 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 632 Seminar in Political Theory
This course is a survey of leading research in and approaches to political theory and political philosophy, including the history of political thought, normative political theory and contemporary political thought.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 685 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 634 Policy Analysis and Program Evaluation
This course focuses upon methods of assessing consequences of public policies. The main purpose of the course is to allow students to survey evaluation research in political science and to present research designs that will enable them to make plausible assumptions about the outcome of governmental programs in the absence of experimental control.
POLI 635 Biotechnology, Agriculture and Food Policy
The purpose of this course is to explore the ethical and policy dilemmas that rapid scientific and technological advances in biotechnology pose for issues of agriculture and food security. The course focuses on Canadian policy within a comparative perspective and examines alternative policy responses, such as found in the US, EU and developing countries.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 685 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 636 Theories of Public Policy and Public Administration
The course explores the diverse intellectual and ideological origins of Public Administration and Public Policy. The focus is on the comparative and critical analysis of the theoretical models under study. Students are encouraged to think analytically and to apply theoretical frameworks to their own empirical enquiries.
POLI 637 Democracy and Regime Change
This seminar examines the various definitions and understandings of democratic and authoritarian regimes and the principal moments of regime change (breakdown, transition, post-transition, and consolidation). It focuses on institution-building, the actors involved in the process of regime change and the political economy of transitions.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under POLI 687B may not take this course for credit.
POLI 638 Seminar in Canadian and Quebec Politics
This course is a survey of the field at an advanced level. It presents a discussion of contemporary issues and controversies in Canadian and Quebec Politics.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 683 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 643 Rational and Public Choice
This course deals with understanding the micro-analytical foundations of individual and group behaviour in political life. It introduces students to the main concepts, theorems and their applications in positive analytical politics including game theory, spatial modeling and institutional analysis.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under POLI 687C may not take this course for credit.
POLI 644 Research Methods
This course introduces students to the logic and methodology of Political Science research and public policy analysis.
POLI 645 Indigenous Peoples and the State
This course examines the political and administrative context in which Indigenous Peoples and the state coexist as well as the tensions between European and Indigenous modes of governance. It focuses on the evolution of institutions and policies regulating this relationship, and the governance strategies developed consistent with Indigenous traditions. The Canadian case serves as the focus but other countries may be considered.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under POLI 683M may not take this course for credit.
POLI 646 History of Thought in Political Economy
This course presents a survey of the major ideas which have shaped the various approaches to political economy from the classical theorists to twentieth century thinkers. The historical and contemporary influence of these ideas on public policy is evaluated.
POLI 647 International Human Security
An introduction to the growing literature and controversies surrounding the concept of ‘human security’ in international politics, applied specifically to the Canadian foreign policy context. Examined actors include states, non-governmental organizations, international institutions, and ‘civil society’.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under POLI 687O may not take this course for credit.
POLI 648 Feminist Critiques of Public Policy
This course provides an in-depth examination of feminist and critical perspectives of public policy and administration. The course seeks to examine the ways in which social location is implicated in (and mediated by) public policy theory and practice. Specific topics may include the state of bureaucracy, state-society relations, public policy discourses, structures, processes and outcomes, and substantive issue areas, such as body politics, social and economic policy, and the labour market.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 683 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 649 Gender and Global Politics
This seminar focuses on the intersection of the global and the local through different methodological and theoretical approaches to the study of gender. Drawing from texts from the fields of comparative politics, international relations and sociology, the course exposes class participants to different scholarly treatments of gender and politics especially as these treatments have evolved in a post-Cold War era of increasing globalization.
POLI 652 Science, Technology and Power
This course introduces students to the growing field of science policy analysis. It provides an overview of the theoretical approaches and analytical tools used in the area and critically discusses various policy mechanisms now in place as well as current and emerging issues.
POLI 654 Concepts of the State
This course examines several of the most significant attempts made by modern political thinkers to answer the question, “What is the modern state?” It addresses both the historical emergence of the modern state and the various ways that this emergence has been theorized. Special emphasis is placed on the differences and interconnections between historical, theoretical, and practical questions.
POLI 657 Nationalism and Ethnicity
This seminar discusses the nature, dynamics and consequences of nationalism. The emphasis is placed on presenting and discussing various theoretical understandings of identity and nationalist mobilization. It examines conceptual issues relating to the study of nationalism, namely the nature, origins and characterizations of nations and nationalism and the strategies for regulation of nationalist conflict.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under POLI 687H may not take this course for credit.
POLI 658 Authors of the Political Imagination
This course examines a broad range of literary and non-literary genres for their potential to inform and redirect the political imagination. The seminar adopts a broadly comparative perspective on literature, culture, politics and individual motivation.
POLI 659 International Organizations
This course explores the role of international organizations, institutions and regimes in world politics. The course covers intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations as well as informal institutional arrangements. It surveys theoretical debates regarding the origins, dynamics, and significance of international organizations, and examines their role in areas such as international security, international political economy, and regional integration. The course also considers debates over democratic accountability within international organizations and the efficacy of global governance.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 687 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 662 International Political Economy
This course covers theories from macroeconomics and international relations and their application to major historical and contemporary events in the evolution of the global political economy. Topics include international trade and finance, economic development,regional integration and globalization, North-South relations, the emergence of multinational corporations, and international organizations such as the World Bank, IMF, WTO, OECD, and UNCTAD.
POLI 681 Special Topics in Comparative Politics
POLI 683 Special Topics in Public Policy and Administration
POLI 684 Special Topics in Canadian and Quebec Politics
POLI 685 Special Topics in Political Theory
POLI 687 Special Topics in International Politics
POLI 691 Extended Research Essay (12 credits)
The Extended Research Essay is a directed study supervised by a faculty member with whom a student completed a course in their area of concentration. Requiring additional research, this degree requirement builds on a term paper submitted at the graduate level in a concentration course and is considered to be a significant revision and extension of that paper, with an extensive bibliography.
POLI 693 Internship with Research Paper (21 credits)
The Internship is a four-month job placement in either the public or private sector. Under the direction of a faculty supervisor, the student prepares an original, theoretical work that comprises a series of policy recommendations that contribute to the policy process in Canada.
POLI 695 Directed Studies
Independent study in the area of concentration.
Cognate Courses
Students may enrol in cognate courses in the John Molson School of Business and in the Departments of Communication Studies, Economics, Education, and Sociology and Anthropology in the Faculty of Arts and Science. Permission of the Graduate Program Directors of both the Master of/Magisteriate in Arts (Public Policy and Public Administration) and the second department is required.
PSYC 844, 845, 846 or 847 (3 to12 credits). Each 3-credit seminar may be taken up to 4 times as an elective option provided the topic differs.
PSYC 700, 701, 714, 716, 721, 722, 724, 725, 726,727, 734, 850, or 851 (6-15 credits). Special Topics seminars PSYC 721, 722, 724, 725, 726, and 727 may be taken multiple times as an elective option provided that the course content has changed.
Research and Clinical Training Option (18 credits):
In addition to the core courses, students select from the following sets of courses for a maximum of 18 credits:
PSYC 823, 824, or 825 (3 credits); PSYC 834 (3 credits); PSYC 835, 836, or 837 (3 credits); PSYC 841, 842, or 843 (3 credits); PSYC 838, 839, or 840 (3 credits); and PSYC 885 (3 credits).
At least one adult and one child client must be seen in the required practicum courses ((APC Practicum II or III, Extramural Practicum I). All students following the Research and Clinical Training Option are expected to attend case conferences at the Applied Psychology Centre training clinic.
Academic Regulations
Academic Standing. Please refer to the Academic Standing section of the Calendar for a detailed review of the Academic Regulations.
Time Limit. Please refer to the Academic Regulation page for further details regarding the Time Limit requirements. In the case of the Diploma in Clinical Psychology, the time limit is 9 terms (3 years) for full-time students; for part-time students the time limit is 15 terms (5 years).
Graduation Requirement. In order to graduate, students must have a cumulative GPA of at least 3.00.
Courses
The following are 3-credit courses unless otherwise indicated.
PSYC 700 Psychopathology
Prerequisite: Undergraduate course in behaviour disorders or equivalent.
This seminar deals with historical and current approaches to the study of behaviour disorders and problems of life adjustment in both adults and children, including critical evaluation of empirical findings in selected areas. Classification systems, including the current revision of the APA Diagnostic and Statistical Manual, are critically reviewed. Students with credit for PSYC 660 or 860 may not take this course for credit.
PSYC 701 Models of Assessment I
Prerequisite: PSYC 700; Co-requisite: PSYC 706 or permission of the Director of Clinical Training.
Focusing on cognitive and ability testing of children and adults, this course stresses the conceptual bases of ability testing, research results and their implications for test interpretation, and strengths and limitations of current test batteries for children and adults. Specific course content includes: a) measurement theory, including issues of test construction, reliability, validity, and evaluation; b) appropriate use and interpretation of specific cognitive assessment batteries (e.g. the Wechsler and Stanford-Binet scales for children and adults); and c) special assessment issues, including the testing of minorities and assessment-related ethical problems. A practicum in assessment techniques (PSYC 706) is typically taken in conjunction with this course.
PSYC 714 Central Topics in Psychology (6 credits)
This general seminar deals with basic theoretical and research issues in Psychology. Topics are drawn from a wide range of areas in Psychology including perceptual and cognitive processes, learning, motivation, and psycho-pathology. Issues are considered with respect to developmental, physiological and social approaches. Students who have received credit for PSYC 602 may not take this course for credit.
PSYC 716 Advanced Human Development
This seminar on theory and research focuses on human development and developmental processes. Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided that the course content has changed. Change in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number.
PSYC 721 Special Topics Seminar
This seminar provides an advanced treatment of specialized research literature in an integrative or selected area of psychology outside the department’s major areas of specialization. It may be offered as a seminar, tutorial or directed reading course, or in any other format, subject to approval of the program director. Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course multiple times provided that the course content has changed.
PSYC 722 Focused Topic Seminar (1.5 credits)
This seminar provides an advanced treatment of specialized research literature in a selected area of psychology. It may be offered as a seminar, tutorial or directed reading course, or in any other format, subject to approval of the program director. Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course multiple times provided that the course content has changed.
PSYC 724 Special Topics in Clinical and Health Psychology
This course provides an advanced treatment of specialized research literature in an area of clinical and/or health psychology. It may be offered as a seminar, tutorial or directed reading course, or in any other format, subject to approval of the program director. Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course multiple times provided that the course content has changed.
PSYC 725 Special Topics in Cognitive Science
This course provides an advanced treatment of specialized research literature in an area of cognitive science. It may be offered as a seminar, tutorial or directed reading course, or in any other format, subject to approval of the program director. Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course multiple times provided that the course content has changed.
PSYC 726 Special Topics in Human Development
This course provides an advanced treatment of specialized research literature in an area of human development and developmental processes. It may be offered as a seminar, tutorial or directed reading course, or in any other format, subject to approval of the program director. Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course multiple times provided that the course content has changed.
PSYC 727 Special Topics in Behavioural Neuroscience
This course provides an advanced treatment of specialized research literature in an area of behavioural neuroscience. It may be offered as a seminar, tutorial or directed reading course, or in any other format, subject to approval of the program director. Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course multiple times provided that the course content has changed.
PSYC 734 Multivariate Statistics
Prerequisite: PSYC 601.
Building upon material presented in PSYC 601, this course covers latent variable analyses and multivariate procedures, including factor analysis, structural equation modelling, multiple group models, and multilevel modelling.
PSYC 801 Research Seminar I
A seminar attended by all doctoral students in which specific research proposals and related theoretical issues and methodological problems are presented for discussion by students and participating faculty.
PSYC 802 Research Seminar II
A continuation of PSYC 801.
PSYC 823 APC Practicum III: General
Prerequisite: PSYC 708 (or 709 or 710), 711 (or 712 or 713). Prerequisite or Co-requisite: PSYC 834, 835 (or 836 or 837), and permission of the Director of Clinical Training.
Advanced students are expected to begin to define clinical interests and treatment methods consonant with their career goals. They receive the appropriate clinical experience and supervision in this practicum (e.g., working with children, adolescents, adults, working with clients who present particular types of problems).
PSYC 824 APC Practicum III: Adult
Prerequisite: PSYC 708 (or 709 or 710), 711 (or 712 or 713). Prerequisite or Co-requisite: PSYC 834, 835 (or 836 or 837), and permission of the Director of Clinical Training.
Advanced students are expected to begin to define clinical interests and treatment methods consonant with their career goals. They receive the appropriate clinical experience and supervision in this practicum working with adult clients, e.g. working with a particular orientation and/or with particular types of problems.
PSYC 825 APC Practicum III: Child
Prerequisite: PSYC 708 (or 709 or 710), 711 (or 712 or 713). Prerequisite or Co-requisite: PSYC 834, 835 (or 836 or 837), and permission of the Director of Clinical Training.
Advanced students are expected to begin to define clinical interests and treatment methods consonant with their career goals. They receive the appropriate clinical experience and supervision in this practicum working with child clients and families, e.g. working with a particular orientation and/or with particular types of problems.
PSYC 826 APC Practicum IV: General
Prerequisite: PSYC 823 (or 824 or 825) and permission of the Director of Clinical Training.
This course is a specialized practicum for advanced students involving clinical experience under supervision.
PSYC 827 APC Practicum IV: Adult
Prerequisite: PSYC 823 (or 824 or 825) and permission of the Director of Clinical Training.
This course is a specialized practicum for advanced students involving clinical experience with adult clients under supervision.
PSYC 828 APC Practicum IV: Child
Prerequisite: PSYC 823 (or 824 or 825) and permission of the Director of Clinical Training.
This course is a specialized practicum for advanced students involving clinical experience with child clients under supervision.
PSYC 834 Advanced Clinical Seminar I
Prerequisite: PSYC 711 (or 712 or 713), 708 (or 709 or 710), and permission of Director of Clinical Training.
This seminar provides an advanced treatment of issues in current psychological theory and research that are relevant to clinical practice, e.g., causal models and their assumptions, legal and ethical issues, classification by state, trait, and situational context; brain-behaviour relations. The aims are to foster in students a) regular review of clinically relevant literature; b) a critical perspective regarding current clinical practices; and c) guidelines and criteria for optimal assessment and treatment decisions tailored to the needs of clients.
PSYC 835 Advanced Clinical Seminar II: Adult
Prerequisite: PSYC 834.
The seminar provides an advanced analysis of issues in the assessment and treatment of behaviour disorders in adulthood. Prototype cases are presented for illustrative discussion of particular clinical issues, e.g. indicators of risk for suicide, homicide, and psychosis; imagery and dreams in psychological treatment; stress-related physical disorders; anxiety-spectrum disorders; treatment for couples, families, and groups. Assessment and treatment approaches to particular disorders are compared with reference to etiological assumptions and levels of inference.
PSYC 836 Advanced Clinical Seminar II: Child
Prerequisite: PSYC 834.
The seminar provides an advanced analysis of issues in the assessment and treatment of behaviour disorders in children in a developmental context. Prototype cases are presented for illustrative discussion of particular clinical issues, e.g. stress-related physical disorders; family therapy; child abuse; age-related symptom expression and variability; non-verbal therapies.
PSYC 837 Advanced Clinical Seminar II: General
Prerequisite: PSYC 834.
This seminar is a blend of issues examined in PSYC 835 and 836 (see above).
PSYC 838 Extramural Practicum II: General
Prerequisite: PSYC 708 (or 709 or 710), 711 (or 712 or 713), and permission of the Director of Clinical Training.
This course is a senior extramural practicum, done under qualified supervision in an applied setting approved by the department’s practicum committee, e.g. hospitals, clinics, schools, community and rehabilitation centres.
PSYC 839 Extramural Practicum II: Adult
Prerequisite: PSYC 708 (or 709 or 710), 711 (or 712 or 713), and permission of the Director of Clinical Training.
This course is a senior extramural practicum with adult clients, done under qualified supervision in an applied setting approved by the department’s practicum committee, e.g. hospitals, clinics, schools, community and rehabilitation centres.
PSYC 840 Extramural Practicum II: Child
Prerequisite: PSYC 708 (or 709 or 710), 711 (or 712 or 713), and permission of the Director of Clinical Training.
This course is a senior extramural practicum with child clients done under qualified supervision in an applied setting approved by the department’s practicum committee, e.g. hospitals, clinics, schools, community and rehabilitation centres.
PSYC 841 Extramural Practicum III: General
This course is a senior extramural practicum, done under qualified supervision in an applied setting approved by the department’s practicum committee, e.g. hospitals, clinics, schools, community and rehabilitation centres.
PSYC 842 Extramural Practicum III: Adult
This course is a senior extramural practicum with adult clients, done under qualified supervision in an applied setting approved by the department’s practicum committee, e.g. hospitals, clinics, schools, community and rehabilitation centres.
PSYC 843 Extramural Practicum III: Child
This course is a senior extramural practicum with child clients, done under qualified supervision in an applied setting approved by the department’s practicum committee, e.g. hospitals, clinics, schools, community and rehabilitation centres.
PSYC 844 Clinical and Health Research Area Seminar II
This seminar provides the opportunity for faculty and students working in clinical and health psychology to present and discuss their current research.
Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course up to 4 times provided that the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. PSYC 844A, PSYC 844B.
PSYC 845 Cognitive Science Area Seminar II
This seminar provides the opportunity for faculty and students working in cognitive science to present and discuss their current research.
Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course up to 4 times provided that the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. PSYC 845A, PSYC 845B.
PSYC 846 Human Development Area Seminar II
This seminar provides the opportunity for faculty and students working on human development and developmental processes to present and discuss their current research.
Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course up to 4 times provided that the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. PSYC 846A, PSYC 846B.
PSYC 847 Behavioural Neuroscience Area Seminar II
This seminar provides the opportunity for faculty and students working in behavioural neuroscience to present and discuss their current research.
Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course up to 4 times provided that the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. PSYC 847A, PSYC 847B.
PSYC 850 Practicum in Research Techniques (3 or 6 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the PhD Program Director.
This practicum is designed to give students the opportunity to develop their research skills by such activities as learning new experimental and technical approaches, developing instruments or computer programs to support research, developing expertise in advanced statistical methods, or other equivalent activities.
PSYC 851 Teaching of Research Techniques
Prerequisite: Permission of PhD Program Director.
This practicum is designed to train students in the teaching of research techniques. Under supervision, the student is responsible for training an apprentice in specialized experimental skills or research techniques that may include advanced statistical methods, or other equivalent activities. Prior to beginning the work, students submit a detailed outline of the planned teaching activities to be approved by the program director.
PSYC 880 PhD Comprehensive Examination (non-credit)
PSYC 885 Predoctoral Internship
Prerequisite: PSYC 835 (or 836 or 837), 823 (824 or 825), and permission of the Director of Clinical Training.
The pre-doctoral internship consists of the equivalent of 12 months full-time employment under qualified supervision in an applied setting approved by the department’s internship committee. The internship is usually done after completion of course requirements, and after data collection and analysis, and a draft of the doctoral thesis have been completed.
PSYC 890 Research and Thesis (60 credits)
PSYC 690 Research and Thesis (30 credits)
PSYC 700 Psychopathology
Prerequisite: Undergraduate course in behaviour disorders or equivalent.
This seminar deals with historical and current approaches to the study of behaviour disorders and problems of life adjustment in both adults and children, including critical evaluation of empirical findings in selected areas. Classification systems, including the current revision of the APA Diagnostic and Statistical Manual, are critically reviewed. Students with credit for PSYC 660 or 860 may not take this course for credit.
PSYC 714 Central Topics in Psychology (6 credits)
This general seminar deals with basic theoretical and research issues in Psychology. Topics are drawn from a wide range of areas in Psychology including perceptual and cognitive processes, learning, motivation, and psycho-pathology. Issues are considered with respect to developmental, physiological and social approaches. Students who have received credit for PSYC 602 may not take this course for credit.
PSYC 716 Advanced Human Development
This seminar on theory and research focuses on human development and developmental processes. Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided that the course content has changed. Change in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number.
PSYC 721 Special Topics Seminar
This seminar provides an advanced treatment of specialized research literature in an integrative or selected area of psychology outside the department’s major areas of specialization. It may be offered as a seminar, tutorial or directed reading course, or in any other format, subject to approval of the program director. Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course multiple times provided that the course content has changed.
PSYC 722 Focused Topic Seminar (1.5 credits)
This seminar provides an advanced treatment of specialized research literature in a selected area of psychology. It may be offered as a seminar, tutorial or directed reading course, or in any other format, subject to approval of the program director. Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course multiple times provided that the course content has changed.
PSYC 724 Special Topics in Clinical and Health Psychology
This course provides an advanced treatment of specialized research literature in an area of clinical and/or health psychology. It may be offered as a seminar, tutorial or directed reading course, or in any other format, subject to approval of the program director. Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course multiple times provided that the course content has changed.
PSYC 725 Special Topics in Cognitive Science
This course provides an advanced treatment of specialized research literature in an area of cognitive science. It may be offered as a seminar, tutorial or directed reading course, or in any other format, subject to approval of the program director. Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course multiple times provided that the course content has changed.
PSYC 726 Special Topics in Human Development
This course provides an advanced treatment of specialized research literature in an area of human development and developmental processes. It may be offered as a seminar, tutorial or directed reading course, or in any other format, subject to approval of the program director. Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course multiple times provided that the course content has changed.
PSYC 727 Special Topics in Behavioural Neuroscience
This course provides an advanced treatment of specialized research literature in an area of behavioural neuroscience. It may be offered as a seminar, tutorial or directed reading course, or in any other format, subject to approval of the program director. Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course multiple times provided that the course content has changed.
PSYC 734 Multivariate Statistics
Prerequisite: PSYC 601.
Building upon material presented in PSYC 601, this course covers latent variable analyses and multivariate procedures, including factor analysis, structural equation modelling, multiple group models, and multilevel modelling.
AHSC 610 Group Process Intervention (3 credits)
This course is oriented to the theory and practice of intervention in small groups. The course involves participation in a small group laboratory through which students’ experiences are integrated with conceptual frameworks, including theories of group development and leadership. Ethical issues in group processes will be considered.
AHSC 620 Learning and Individual Change Processes (3 credits)
This course will examine research and theory of individual learning and change which involves cognitive, affective and behavioural components. Intervention with an emphasis on a normative re-educative approach to facilitating learning and change will be emphasized. Illustrative intervention cases will be examined to identify essential qualities, underlying assumptions about learning and change in the context of human systems, and implications for the role of the intervener.
AHSC 631 Research Methods (3 credits)
This course examines research methods involved in action research and other applied field perspectives. Methods applicable at all stages of the research process include the literature review, defining the purpose of study, design of quantitative and qualitative research tools, data gathering, qualitative and quantitative data analysis, and reporting and communicating research results and recommendations.
Note: Students who have received credit for AHSC 630 may not take this course for credit.
AHSC 632 Planning Human Systems Intervention (3 credits)
This course examines the design and implementation of intervention programs from a systems perspective based on organizational theories, needs assessment, theories of learning and change, and group processes. It builds on basic concepts of organizational dynamics and effective human systems. Emphasis is on understanding organizational and group processes, development of planning skills, and making strategic choices. Interventions are framed in the context of collaborative action research with participant involvement at all stages including problem analysis and definition, generating and selection intervention strategies, action planning, implementation, and project evaluation.
Note: Students who have received credit for AHSC 630 may not take this course for credit.
AHSC 660 Philosophy and Ethics of Intervention (3 credits)
This course will review the philosophical underpinnings of intervention in human systems with an emphasis on a normative re-educative approach. It will address core values and ethics imbedded in change efforts, as well as examining the philosophical roots of different traditions of change methodology. It will consider the philosophical implications of change agents functioning as consultants rather than experts and as process rather than content specialists. It will consider ethical and philosophical aspects of power, strategy, and conflict, among other issues associated with intervention.
AHSC 670 Consultation Methods (3 credits)
The course will examine current models of consultation. It will enable students to establish effective client-consultant relationships based on collaborative approaches to entry, diagnosis, planning, and implementation. Ethical concerns for consultation will be integrated with discussions of methodology. Through observation and analysis of student-designed interventions, the course will provide experience-based learning and feedback. Special attention will be given to considerations of power, conflict, decision-making, negotiation, problem-solving, planning, and strategy.
AHSC 680 Facilitating Individual and Group Learning Processes (6 credits)
Prerequisite: Completion of Year I coursework (AHSC 610, 620, 631, 632, 660, 670).
This course will focus on interventions at the individual and group levels. Client-centred models of working in groups to achieve learning and task objectives will be reviewed. Issues of design, planning, and implementation of learning programs for individuals and groups, including attention to power, problem-solving, decision-making and conflict management will be examined in a laboratory setting where students will plan and conduct a group learning program under supervision.
AHSC 685 Coaching Interventions and Processes (3 credits)
This course develops professional understanding of theories and methodologies relevant to individual coaching processes in the functioning of groups, organizations and communities. Emphasis is placed on the development of competencies in executive, managerial and employee coaching. Course content encompasses phases of the coaching process, communication methodologies, obstacles and barriers to change, individual change models, strategic individual interventions, dealing with resistance, philosophy and ethics of coaching, and coaching structures. Practical components are integrated into the course.
Elective Courses
AHSC 675 Introduction to Open Systems Theory (3 credits)
This course introduces the socio-ecological version of open systems theory (OST) and practice with a particular focus on the Search Conference, the Participative Design Workshop, and Unique Designs. OST was developed to promote and create change toward a world that is consciously designed by people, and for people, living harmoniously within their ecological systems, both physical and social. Students learn how to design and implement interventions in organizations, communities and larger social systems.
Note: Students who have received credit for this course under an AHSC 681 number may not take this course for credit.
AHSC 681 Special Topics (3 credits)
Topical seminars will be offered to provide perspectives about current intervention themes. These may complement students’ programs, but will not constitute part of the required curriculum. Examples include: emerging trends in organizational development; strategic planning models; the use of self as an instrument of change; intercultural issues in intervention; appreciative inquiry; complexity theory.
AHSC 682 Special Topics (6 credits)
Same as AHSC 681 when a second special topic is offered in the same term.
AHSC 695 Independent Study I (3 credits)
Students may pursue studies in areas of specialized professional interest related to the graduate program or as a means of strengthening understanding of the core areas of the graduate program.
AHSC 696 Independent Study II (3 credits)
Students may pursue a second area of specialized professional interest related to the graduate program or further develop understanding in the core areas of the graduate program.
Project
AHSC 698 Master’s Project (15 credits)
Prerequisite: Completion of AHSC 680.
Students must demonstrate their ability to conduct a complete intervention to effect change in a human system as the principal consultant in a collaborative relationship with a client representing that system. The project includes contracting with the client, gathering and analyzing data, implementing relevant intervention activities, and evaluating the intervention as well as their role.
AHSC 510 Advanced Research Methods in Youth Work (3 credits)
This course reviews approaches to applied research that are applicable to youth work practice. Students compare a range of methodological approaches, explore definitions of evidence-based practice and learn techniques for collecting, analyzing and disseminating qualitative and quantitative data. Students undertake an applied research project, relevant to an area of practice or programs of intervention with youth. Emphasis is placed on ethical issues, developmentally appropriate research practices, and accountability.
AHSC 520 Psychoeducation and Youth Work Ethics in Practice (3 credits)
This course provides an introduction to applied ethics in youth work with a focus on the Code of Ethics of the Ordre des psychoéducateurs et psychoéducatrices du Québec. It also reviews the policy, legislative and organizational contexts of the practice of psychoeducation and youth work, and considers the ways in which models of ethical decision making inform practice. Topics include confidentiality and information sharing in inter-professional contexts, balancing issues of control, empowerment and education, developing critical reflexivity, and appreciating the complexities and dilemmas inherent in youth work practice.
AHSC 522 Fundamentals of Child and Youth Care Work (3 credits)
This course provides students with an understanding of the scope and status of child and youth care work, sensitizes them to the necessary competencies and daily challenges of this work in a range of settings, and reviews relevant theory. Intervention planning in the context of psychoeducation and relational child and youth care work is emphasized.
AHSC 525 Individual and Group Intervention with Youth (3 credits)
Prerequisite: AHSC 522 previously or concurrently.
A main focus of this course is to develop skills in relationship building and communication with youth. A micro-skills approach is introduced, as well as principles of group leadership and crisis intervention with youth. Principles of reflexive youth work, including developmentally-informed group leadership, are also covered.
AHSC 527 Advanced Youth Work Intervention: Case Management and Supervision (3 credits)
Prerequisite: AHSC 525.
This course explores the fundamental concepts and theories of case management and supervision as applied to youth work practice. Topics include supervisory relationship and process issues, self-care, ethical and professional considerations, leadership and mentoring relationships, multi-disciplinary teams and teamwork, managing change, debriefing in response to a crisis and developing, implementing and monitoring effective and collaborative case plans with young people and their families.
AHSC 530 Community Youth Development (3 credits)
Prerequisite: AHSC 525.
This course explores both historical and contemporary foundations of non-formal, community-based youth development in Canada and internationally. It focuses on creating opportunities for youth to engage with individuals, organizations and institutions at the community level. Various community youth development models are explored in-depth with practical applications for community-based youth programs, including life skills, assets, resiliency, and ecological models. Emphasis is placed on research, theory and practice applied in community youth development environments.
AHSC 540 Mental Health and Addictions: Youth Work Perspectives, Policies and Practices (3 credits)
Prerequisite: AHSC 525.
This course explores the precursors, presentations, nature and impacts of mental health concerns and addictions for youth, their families, and within communities. Students have the opportunity to develop, and apply within the classroom, knowledge and skills related to addictions and mental illness prevention, assessment and intervention, and mental health promotion. Topics include an introduction to adolescent psychopathology; diagnosis, assessment, and current policy and practices in relation to the current edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of the American Psychiatric Association (DSM); the uses of standardized testing to evaluate adaptation; psychopharmacology; suicide; evidence-based and alternative treatment interventions (e.g., psychoeducational approaches; dialectical behaviour therapy);ethical and legislative considerations; and the roles/responsibilities of youth workers in the inter-professional and community care of adolescents with mental health and/or addictions concerns.
AHSC 565 Parent-Child Relations (3 credits)
This course provides an advanced understanding of parenting theories, research, and applications in the context of parent-child relations over the life span. Topics include parenting rights and responsibilities, parenting practices and programs, high-risk parenting, issues in the transition from parenting children to parenting adolescents and parental assessment.
Elective Courses
AHSC 512 Sexuality in Human Relations (3 credits)
This course provides students with knowledge of physical and psychosocial aspects of sexuality in relationships through life and specifically during adolescence with an examination of values, attitudes, and issues related to the development and expression of sexuality. Topics include gender identity development, fuzzy identities, teen pregnancy, family, cultural and media influences; historically and culturally based attitudes; prevention and sexually transmitted diseases; self-perception and identity in sexuality; sexual diversity; and emotion and sexuality. The course aims to foster respect for persons and diversity.
AHSC 513 Family Communication (3 credits)
This course is an examination of patterns, effective approaches, and issues in communication among persons in primary partnerships and families with adolescents. It also explores topics such as diversity in forms of “family,” decision-making, problem-solving, power relations, gender issues, managing differences in expectations, and the influences of cultural, social, and economic contexts. Interventions for youth work practice designed to enhance communication and strengthen the parent-youth bond are explored.
AHSC 551 Counselling Skills and Concepts (6 credits)
This course advances students’ understanding of core counselling theories and develops an understanding for theoretical and value frameworks of the youth work therapeutic relationship. It fosters the application of essential helping skills for relational practice within youth work settings. Skill areas include attending skills, such as attending to nonverbal behaviour, reflection of content, reflection of feeling, paraphrasing and summarizing, empathy, selfdisclosure; and influencing skills, such as interpretation and analysis. Also highlighted are ethical issues, attention to cultural differences, and practitioner reflexivity.
AHSC 560 Health Promotion (6 credits)
This course helps students to develop intervention skills and theoretical understanding in the area of health promotion across the lifespan. It is of particular interest to youth work students whose career interests involve lifestyle planning, health and wellness promotion, and stress management with young people. A holistic approach including cultural and developmental understandings are discussed in relation to the following topics: health and wellness, stress and illness, psychological and physical self‑appraisal processes, psychosomatic processes and disorders, understanding addictions and their management, interventions to promote health and wellness, behavioural self‑management, and issues in medical/psychological health compliance.
AHSC 598 Special Topics in Youth Work (3 credits)
Specific topics for this course and prerequisites relevant in each case are stated in the Graduate Class Schedule.
AHSC 599 Independent Study (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the Department.
Students work on topics in consultation with a study supervisor. The study may include readings, field studies, and/or research.
Fieldwork
AHSC 533 Internship I in Youth Work (3 credits)
Prerequisites: AHSC 522, 525.
This entry-level internship in youth work is designed to provide an opportunity for a first field experience that promotes integration into a clinical or normative youth work setting. A major focus is on participatory observation. Students are required to participate in a field placement one day per week, for a total of 100 hours in settings such as schools, community organizations, hospitals, or rehabilitation centres. The site is selected in consultation with the Graduate Program Director.
AHSC 537 Internship II in Youth Work (6 credits)
Prerequisites: AHSC 533 and 12 credits completed in youth work with permission of the Department.
This 220-hour internship is designed to provide a supervised apprenticeship in either a clinical or normative youth work setting that builds on the student’s previous courses. The focus of this internship is that the student fully assumes all the duties and responsibilities of a youth worker in the same site selected for the first internship. The student’s work is supervised and evaluated by an on-site field supervisor.
OR
AHSC 538 Extended Internship in Youth Work (9 credits)
Prerequisites: AHSC 533 and 12 credits completed in youth work with permission of the Department.
This 320-hour internship is designed to provide a full-time supervised experience in either a clinical or a normative youth work setting and requires additional hours to assist the student in building his/her application for licensing. The focus of this internship is that the student fully assumes all the duties and responsibilities of a youth worker in the same site selected for the first internship. The student’s work is supervised and evaluated by an on-site field supervisor.
BIOL 850 Research proposal and qualifying exam (6 credits)
The student prepares a written research proposal based upon the research topic chosen for thesis research. The proposal is prepared in consultation with the supervisory committee and contains a literature review, a progress report and a detailed description of future experiments. The proposal should demonstrate a good understanding of the background of the project, the questions to be answered, and the experimental approaches needed to answer these questions. Both the written proposal and an oral summary of the proposal are presented to the examining committee within one year of entry into the PhD program.
BIOL 890 Research and thesis (75 credits)
BIOL 696 Master’s Research and Thesis (36 credits)
The following courses in Biochemistry may be taken for credit in the program.
CHEM 670 Selected Topics in Biochemistry and Biophysics
CHEM 671 Structure and Function of Biomembranes
CHEM 673 Neurochemistry
CHEM 677 Enzyme Kinetics and Mechanism
CHEM 678 Protein Engineering and Design
BIOL 616 Current Advances in Ecological Research
This course is given in alternate years and reviews selected areas of current research in ecology, evolution and behaviour through critical analysis of recent publications. Topics vary from year to year, and are determined in part by the interests of the students. Material covered may include papers published in refereed journals, monographs or books on specialized topics, or new textbooks covering advanced topics in a relevant area. Students are responsible for giving class presentations of selected material, leading class discussions, and submitting critiques and answers to assigned essay questions. Grading is based upon class participation, oral presentations and written work. Lectures only. (No laboratory component).
BIOL 622 Advanced Techniques in Ecology *
This course introduces students to a variety of techniques of experimental design, data collection, and quantitative analysis. Students participate in a series of modules, each of which presents experimental and analytical techniques appropriate for one area of modern research in ecology, behaviour, or evolution. Some modules require students to collect and subsequently analyze original data from field or laboratory settings. Modules and their contents may vary from year to year. Tutorials and laboratory.
BIOL 623 Advanced Applied Ecology and Conservation *
This course applies principles of ecology at the individual, population, community and ecosystem level to identify and solve practical environmental problems. Topics include pollution, climate change, and farming, harvesting renewable resources, designing nature reserves and conserving bio-diversity. Lectures and tutorials.
BIOL 624 Advances in Decomposer Communities and Nutrient Cycling *
This course examines the role of the microbial community in the fundamental processes of decomposition and nutrient cycling. We discuss the role of microbes in the breakdown of organic molecules and the release and transformation of mineral elements. Emphasis is placed on the interactions between decomposition and on the interactions between bacteria, fungi, and the microbes in the maintenance of nutrient cycles. Lectures and laboratory.
BIOL 633 Advanced Immunology *
The role of the immune system in maintenance of body homeostasis will be presented with particular reference to cells and tissues of the immune system, their organization as well as their structural and functional relationships. Topics include: maturation and differentiation of B and T lymphocytes; structure and properties of antibodies; immune responses to antigens; genetic aspects of antibody synthesis; immunological considerations in AIDS, cancer, and autoimmune diseases. Lectures and seminars.
BIOL 634 Advanced Cell Biology *
Lectures dealing with selected topics in mammalian cell biology. These include introduction to the elements of cell biology. Introduction to the elements of cell culture with reference to the growth and function of non-differentiated and differentiated cells. Control of cell cycling under normal and abnormal states, mechanisms of peptide and steroid hormone action with emphasis on intracellular signaling pathways. The control of gene transcription and detailed analysis of the effect of host cell factors on virus replication. Lectures only.
BIOL 660 Advanced Plant Biochemistry *
Biochemical study of the natural constituents and secondary metabolites unique to plants. Their biosynthesis, biotransformations, and functions in plants, as well as their economic and pharmacologic importance are stressed. Lectures only.
BIOL 661 Advanced Tissue Culture *
This course looks at plant-growth regulators, nutritional requirements, and other factors necessary for in-vitro culturing of plant cells and tissues. The course also discusses methods available for nuclear transfers and the propagation of transformed plants. Lectures only.
BIOL 670 Scientific Communication
This course is offered every other year and is open to all graduate students in Biology or by special permission from the instructor. It is designed to present the requirements for publishable scientific writing, successful research proposals and the presentation of oral papers at scientific meetings. The course emphasizes good writing habits, focuses on the importance of thought, the conciseness of statements and clarity of exposition. The course combines lectures, group discussions, workshops and oral presentations. Marks are based on a number of written assignments, oral presentations as well as participation in class.
BIOL 671 Scanning Electron Microscopy *
This course is given alternate years in the Summer session and explains both the theory and practice of instrumentation and methodology. Students learn to operate the Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) and ancillary equipment such as sputter-coater and the critical point drier. Hands-on learning experience is stressed to acquire familiarity with special techniques. Instructions cover three aspects: instrumentation, specimen preparation (fixation and drying), and specimen mounting and coating. Tutorials and laboratory.
BIOL 687 Advanced Molecular Genetics *
This course concentrates on basic microbial and molecular genetics, introducing isolation and characterization of mutants, methods of mapping mutants, transposons, episomes, and recombinant DNA techniques. Lectures and conferences.
BIOL 688 Advances in Biological Regulatory Mechanisms *
This course examines the molecular basis of the control of metabolic pathways with an emphasis on procaryote systems. The course concentrates on the analysis of the rationale of experimentation used to elucidate these regulatory mechanisms. Lectures and conferences.
BIOL 689 Advanced Techniques in Molecular Biology *
Theory and practice of modern experimental procedures of molecular biology, including use of restriction enzymes, gene cloning, and hybridizations, DNA sequencing, site-directed mutagenesis, and the use of bacteria and phage in biotechnology. Laboratory and tutorials.
BIO 690 Advanced Gene Structure *
This course deals with gene regulation in eukaryotes. Topics covered include transcription, transcript processing, translation, and post-translational processes. Lectures only.
* Course descriptions listed here correspond to undergraduate course descriptions except for BIOL 616 and 670 which are not available to undergraduate students. It is understood that an instructor who grants written permission to register in the course as a graduate student will require extra work from the students for graduate credit. These courses are open to doctoral students only under exceptional circumstances.
BIOL 516 Project in Biotechnology and Genomics (6 credits)
PHIL 530 Ethical, Legal and Social Implications of Biotechnology
Elective Courses (9 credits)
BIOL 521 Industrial and Environmental Biotechnology
BIOL 523 Agriculture and Agri-Food Biotechnology
BIOL 524 High-throughput Instrumentation
BIOL 525 Biological Computing and Synthetic Biology
CHEM 678 Protein Engineering and Design
Academic Regulations
Academic Standing. Please refer to the Academic Standing section of the Calendar for a detailed review of the Academic Regulations.
Time Limit. Please refer to the Academic Regulation page for further details regarding the Time Limit requirements.
Graduation Requirement. To graduate, students must have completed all course requirements with a cumulative grade point average of at least 3.00.
Courses
BIOL 510 Bioinformatics
Prerequisites: BIOL 367 or equivalent; COMP 228 (System Hardware) or permission of the Diploma Program Director.
This course provides the tools for life scientists to interpret and analyze biological sequence data. It provides a general overview of the growth in availability of genetic information. The course covers the genetic databases; the rapidly-increasing number of genome databases, including the human genome database; the sequence homology search engines and search algorithms; software for the identification of structural sequence components; and the determination of evolutionary relationships between sequences.
BIOL 511 Structural Genomics
This course provides an overview of genome analysis including: cloning systems; sequencing strategies; methods of detecting genes and approaches to mapping genomes. It covers the theory and design of the different approaches, and the analysis of genomic data generated from them.
BIOL 512 Functional Genomics
This course focuses on the functional analysis of expressed genes and their products. Course content includes the construction and screening of normalized cDNA libraries, analysis of expressed sequence tags (ESTs), functional analysis by gene knock-outs, localization of gene products by gene knowk-ins, transcription profiling, systematic identification of proteins, and functional analysis of proteins by detection of protein-protein interactions.
BIOL 515 Biotechnology and Genomics Laboratory
This is a hands-on course on techniques used in biotechnology and genomics. Experiments conducted in this course include separation and mapping of high molecular weight DNA fragments, shotgun sequencing, ESTs sequencing, protein production in bacteria and fungi, functional analysis of protein products, protein arrays, and in vivo detection of protein interactions. This course incurs an additional fee to cover laboratory supplies and equipment.
BIOL 516 Project in Biotechnology and Genomics (6 credits)
Prerequisites: BIOL 466; BIOL 368; or permission of the Diploma Program Director.
Each student conducts a project under the supervision of a faculty member at Concordia or other research institutions affiliated with the program. The project topic requires approval by the course coordinator. The project can be taken over an 8-month (10 hours per week) of a 4-month period (20 hours per week) at Concordia or other approved institutions or companies. The project will be chosen from one or more of the following fields: biotechnology, genomics, bioinformatics, and high-throughput experimentation. The nature of the project can be research, development, or application. A student who is working full-time or part-time can pursue the project in his/her place of employment subject to approval. (Approval will only be given to projects which are clearly demonstrated to be independent of the regular work requirement). At the end of the project, the student is required to submit a report on the results of the project and present the results publicly in the form of a scientific poster or a short talk at a scheduled Genomics/Biotechnology Research Day.
BIOL 521 Industrial and Environmental Biotechnology
Prerequisites: BIOL 511; BIOL 512.
This course provides an in-depth evaluation of current biotechnology tools used in pharmaceutical and forestry industries, and in environmental remediation. New technologies and genomic approaches that can be applied to these processes are also discussed.
BIOL 523 Agriculture and Agri-Food Biotechnology
Prerequisites: BIOL 511; BIOL 512.
This course provides an overview on the use of biotechnology in agriculture and in the agri-food industry. Plant genomics and genetic manipulation of plants are emphasized. Also discussed are biotechnology methods used in reducing agricultural pollutants and converting agricultural surplus to energy.
BIOL 524 High-throughput Instrumentation
Prerequisites: BIOL 511; BIOL 512.
This is a hands-on introduction to high-throughput instruments used in biotechnology and genomics. Students are exposed to capillary electrophoresis-based DNA sequencing, microplate-based PCR reactions and purification of PCR products, construction of DNA chips, microarray scanning, and liquid handling robotics. Enrolment in this course is restricted to ten students.
BIOL 525    Biological Computing and Synthetic Biology
This is an interdisciplinary course offered to students who are either in Biology or Electrical and Computer Engineering programs. Students are introduced to the emerging field of synthetic biology and learn to design computational machines that can be implemented in biological media. The term is divided into two phases. In Phase I, Biology students learn basic computer hardware and software concepts, while Engineering students are introduced to gene structure and recombinant DNA technology. In Phase II, all students learn the principles and various applications of cell-based computational machines. Students work in teams to create a project proposal to describe the design of a computational machine using gene regulatory networks. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for COEN 6211 or for this topic under a BIOL 631 or COEN 691 number may not take this course for credit.
PHIL 530 Ethical, Legal, and Social Implications of Biotechnology
Prerequisite: BIOL 367 or permission of the Diploma Program Director.
This interdisciplinary course examines some of the ethical, legal, and social implications of recent developments in biotechnology, genomics, and bioinformatics. Students explore current debates about biotechnologies in the fields of agricultural biotechnology, global development, and environmental risk. Issues such as commercialization and intellectual property, the role of media and public perceptions of biotechnologies, and social responsibility and policy formation are also addressed.
CHEM 896: Research Proposal and Comprehensive Examination (9 credits).
A student in the doctoral program is required to present a progress report on his/her research and on future research plans. The presentation should reflect the student's awareness of current research in his/her field and demonstrate an ability to carry out a significant research problem and provide a rational approach to its solution. The student's knowledge and understanding of fundamental chemical and biochemical principles will also be examined.
The student is expected to complete CHEM 896 within 18 months of admission directly into the PhD program, or within 28 months of admission via the MSc stream. In exceptional circumstances the department may permit an extension of time for completion of this course. The CHEM 896 Examining Committee assigns one of the following two grades: (a) PASS - the student is admitted to candidacy for a PhD degree in Chemistry; (b) FAIL - the student must withdraw from the program.
CHEM 856: Doctoral Research and Thesis (72 credits).
CHEM 668: PhD Research Seminar (3 credits).
The course is designed to give students practice at communicating and defending their thesis research topic in a professional forum, and should successfully inform an audience of chemists and biochemists.
With permission from their supervisory committee students are allowed to substitute graduate level courses from other departments relevant to their research problems, or professional development (e.g., selected MBA courses) as partial fulfillment towards their degree requirements.
Thesis. Students will work on a research topic under the direction of a faculty member and present an acceptable thesis at the conclusion (CHEM 856 - Doctoral Research and Thesis). Students may submit a manuscript-based thesis following the guidelines outlined in the section on Thesis Regulations in this calendar. In addition, a public oral examination will be conducted to test the student's ability to defend the thesis.
Seminars. Each student is required to attend and participate in departmental seminars.
Cross-Registration. Students may, with the permission of their supervisory committee, cross-register for courses falling in the Topics categories in other Quebec institutions.
Academic Regulations
Academic Standing. Please refer to the Academic Standing section of the Calendar for a detailed review of the Academic Regulations.
Program Specific Requirements. Students must obtain an assessment grade point average (AGPA) of 3.00 based on a minimum of 6 credits.
Residence. The minimum period of residence is two years (6 terms) of full-time graduate study beyond the master’s degree or three years (9 terms) of full-time graduate study (or the equivalent in part-time study) beyond the bachelor’s degree for those students who are permitted to enrol for doctoral studies without completing a master’s degree. It should be understood that this is a minimum requirement, and that a longer period may be necessary in order to complete all of the work that is required for the degree.
Time Limit. Please refer to the Academic Regulation page for further details regarding the Time Limit requirements.
Graduation Requirement. In order to graduate, students must have a cumulative GPA of at least 3.00.
Courses
Specific course offerings in subject areas listed under Topics will generally vary from year to year, depending on the availability of faculty and the requirements of graduate students in the program. In the MSc program, every student must complete CHEM 666 (Seminar); in the PhD program CHEM 668 (Seminar) and CHEM 896 (Research Proposal and Comprehensive Examination) must be completed by every student.
Courses are worth 3 credits unless otherwise indicated. Over the next few years the department will offer a selection of courses from those listed below. Additional Selected Topics courses may be offered in a given year, and these will be identified by different subtitles. Further information on Selected Topics courses will be available from the department at the beginning of each academic year.
Topics in Analytical & Bioanalytical Chemistry
CHEM 610 Selected Topics in Analytical Chemistry
This course explores themes within the area of Analytical Chemistry.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. CHEM 610A, CHEM 610B, etc.
CHEM 612 Analytical Separations
Prerequisite: CHEM 218, 312, or equivalent.
High performance liquid separations on an analytical (non-preparative) scale are surveyed. Fundamental separation mechanisms and application of the techniques are discussed. Emphasis is placed on separations of biologically relevant analytes which include peptides, proteins and nucleic acids. Lectures only.
CHEM 614 Modern Aspects of Practical Mass Spectrometry
Prerequisite: CHEM 494 or equivalent, previously or concurrently.
Theoretical and operational aspects of modern mass spectrometry are discussed in a number of formal lectures and training sessions. All students must carry out an independent mass spectrometry project on their molecules of choice. Projects can be selected from all areas of chemistry, biochemistry or biology including the “omics” sciences (e.g., proteomics, metabolomics).
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a CHEM 630 number may not take this course for credit.
Topics in Bioorganic & Organic Chemistry
CHEM 620 Selected Topics in Organic Chemistry
This course explores themes within the area of Organic Chemistry.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. CHEM 620A, CHEM 620B, etc.
CHEM 621 Physical Organic Chemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 222, 235; CHEM 324 or 325; or equivalent.
Determination of organic reaction mechanisms using kinetics, activation parameters, acid-base catalysis, Bronsted catalysis law, solvent effects, medium effects, isotope effects, substitutent effects, and linear free energy relationships. Lectures only.
CHEM 623 Organic Synthesis
Prerequisite: CHEM 222, 235, 324, or equivalent.
This course is concerned with synthetic strategy and design. It provides an introduction to advanced synthetic methods and reagents, involving heteroatoms such as sulphur, phosphorus, tin and selenium, as well as an overview of the uses of protecting groups in organic chemistry. The concept of retrosynthesis and a few asymmetric reactions are discussed using syntheses of natural products from the literature as examples. Lectures only.
CHEM 625 Nucleic Acid Chemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 221, 222, 271, or equivalent.
This course introduces students to various topics in nucleic acid chemistry. The topics include nomenclature, structure and function of RNA and DNA; techniques and methods to investigate nucleic acid structure; DNA damage and repair; interaction of small molecules and proteins with nucleic acid; oligonucleotide-based therapeutics (antisense, antigene, RNAi); synthesis of purines, pyrimidines and nucleosides; and solid-phase oligonucleotide synthesis. Lectures only.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a CHEM 620 number may not take this course for credit.
CHEM 626 Reactive Intermediates
Prerequisite: CHEM 324, 325, or equivalent.
This course offers an introduction to reactive intermediates with an emphasis on structure and stability as found in modern (physical) organic chemistry. While the focus is on radicals and carbenes, carbocations are discussed near the end of the term. The material covered is relevant to chemistry and biochemistry. Lectures only.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a CHEM 621 number may not take this course for credit.
CHEM 627 Supramolecular Chemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 324 or 325; CHEM 335; or equivalent; or permission of the Department.
This course reviews some fundamental aspects of synthetic and biological supramolecular chemistry and nanotechnology. Topics covered may include supramolecular forces, ion binding and ion channels, molecular recognition, self-assembly (meso-scale and molecular-scale), organometallic supramolecular chemistry, dynamic combinatorial chemistry (DCC), and foldamers. Lectures only.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a CHEM 620 number may not take this course for credit.
Topics in Physical Chemistry
CHEM 630 Selected Topics in Physical Chemistry
This course explores themes within the area of Physical Chemistry.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. CHEM 630A, CHEM 630B, etc.
CHEM 631 Computational Chemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 234, 241, 333, or equivalent; or permission of the Department.
This course presents the concepts, tools, and techniques of modern computational chemistry, and provides a very broad overview of the various fields of application across chemistry and biochemistry. The course is divided into two parts: 1) Molecular structure, which covers molecular mechanics and elementary electronic structure theory of atoms and molecules; and 2) Chemical reactivity, which covers applications of quantum chemistry and molecular dynamics techniques to studies of chemical reactions. The applications discussed include organic molecules and their reactions, peptides and proteins, drug design, DNA, polymers, inorganics, and materials. The course includes a practical component where students acquire hands-on experience with commonly used computational chemistry computer software. Lectures and laboratory.
CHEM 632 Non-equilibrium Thermodynamics
Prerequisite: CHEM 234 or equivalent.
In this course, the basic concepts of classical (equilibrium) thermodynamics are first reviewed, followed by an introduction to statistical thermodynamics which gives a unified method of treating transport processes. At this point, the Boltzmann distribution function is derived, which leads to the statistical interpretation of entropy. Other important thermodynamic functions such as the partition function, the partition function for large ensembles and the Sackur-Tetrode equation are examined. The course also addresses non-equilibrium thermodynamics in the linear domain. The relations describing the production of entropy in irreversible processes due to heat transfer, charge transfer, change of volume, and chemical reactions are examined. The establishment of flux equations and the use of the Onsager reciprocal relations are then applied to the description of a variety of open systems. Lectures only.
CHEM 633 Quantum Mechanics in Chemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 333, 431/631, or equivalent.
This course includes a thorough review of basic quantum mechanics in both the Schroedinger and Heisenberg representations, electronic structure theory, symmetry and group theory, interaction of matter with light, quantum scattering, the path integral formalism, quantum theories of chemical reaction rates, time-dependent approaches to spectroscopy, wave packet propagation, correlation functions and dynamics processes, and density matrices. Lectures only.
CHEM 635 Interfacial Phenomena
Prerequisite: CHEM 234, 235, or equivalent.
This course examines the physical chemistry of interfaces including surface and interfacial tensions, the absorption of surface active substances/surface excess properties, and surfactant self-assembly. Topics covered may include Gibbs and Langmuir monolayers, micelle formation, emulsions, foams, surfactant liquid crystals, layer-by-layer polymer self-assembly, and biological membranes. Techniques for characterization and applications (biological and industrial) of these systems are addressed. Lectures only.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a CHEM 630 number may not take this course for credit.
CHEM 638 Physics and Chemistry of Solid State Electronic Materials
Prerequisite: CHEM 234, 333, or equivalent.
This course essentially explores how electrical conductivity is influenced by the nature of the chemical bonding in these solid-state materials. The course provides an introduction to solid-state structures and then goes on to explore band theory, the central model used to describe electrical conductivity in the following three categories of electronic materials: conductors, semiconductors, and insulators. Finally the course explores the extension of the band model to interpret electrical conductivity in molecular semiconductors and charge-transfer complexes. Lectures only.
Topics in Bioinorganic & Inorganic Chemistry
CHEM 640 Selected Topics in Inorganic Chemistry
This course explores themes within the area of Inorganic Chemistry.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. CHEM 640A, CHEM 640B, etc.
CHEM 643 Organometallic Chemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 324, 341, or equivalent.
This course covers the structure and properties of organometallic compounds, their main reactions and their application in catalysis and organic chemistry. Lectures only.
CHEM 644 Physical Methods in Chemistry
This course provides an in-depth evaluation of the different methods used in modern physical chemistry such as laser, microwave, FT-IR, electron spin resonance, nuclear magnetic resonance, x-ray photoelectron, x-ray diffraction and fluorescence, Auger eletron, Mössbauer, and gamma-ray spectroscopic analysis, as well as scanning probe microscopy and mass spectrometry. Lectures only.
CHEM 645 Bioinorganic Chemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 241, 271, or equivalent.
Role of metals in biochemical systems. Essential trace elements, zinc enzymes, oxygen transport and storage, metalloproteins and biological electron transfer, structure-function relationships in heme enzymes, nitrogen fixation; model compounds for metalloproteins and metalloenzymes. Lectures only.
CHEM 646 Industrial Catalysis
Prerequisite: CHEM 234, 235, or equivalent.
Basic and recent concepts in catalysis are described with particular emphasis on heterogenous catalysis. The technical, economic and environmental aspects of industrial catalysis are covered. The processes to be studied are chosen from the petroleum industry, the natural gas and coal processing industry, and the production of thermoplastics and synthetic fibres. The course ends with a rapid survey of problems associated with the treatment of industrial pollutants and with catalytic converters. Lectures only.
Topics in Multidisciplinary Chemistry
CHEM 650 Selected Topics in Multidisciplinary Chemistry
This course explores themes within the area of Multidisciplinary Chemistry.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. CHEM 650A, CHEM 650B, etc.
CHEM 651 Nanochemistry
Prerequisites: CHEM 217, 218, 221, 222, 234, 235, 241, or equivalent.
This modular course covers the areas of production, characterization and applications of nanoscale structures and materials. Each module is taught by a different professor as well as guest lecturers. Topics may include (but are not limited to): size dependent properties, synthesis of organic and inorganic nanostructures, self-assembled structures, chemical patterning and functional nanopatterns, biomaterials. Nanometer scale fabrication techniques such as lithographic methods, nano-stamping and patterned self-assembly are discussed. Modern analysis techniques such as atomic force microscopy and electron microscopy, which are used to map and measure at the single molecule level are introduced. Applications such as photonics, optical properties, biodetection and biosensors, micro- and nano-fluidics, nanoelectronics and nanomachines are presented. The course includes a term project carried out using the nanoscience facilities held in the department research labs.
CHEM 658 Aquatic Biogeochemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 217, 218, 312, or equivalent.
The major aim of this course is to present a quantitative treatment of the variables that determine the composition of natural waters. Chemical equilibrium is the central theme of the course, but consideration is also given to kinetics, steady-state and dynamic models. Related themes include global chemical cycles, air and water pollution, as well as current research topics in water chemistry and chemical oceanography. Lectures only.
Note: Students who have received credit for CHEM 618 or for this topic under a CHEM 610 number may not take this course for credit.
Topics in Biochemistry
CHEM 670 Selected Topics in Biochemistry and Biophysics
This course explores themes within the area of Biochemistry and Biophysics.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. CHEM 670A, CHEM 670B, etc.
CHEM 676 Structure and Function of Biomembranes
Prerequisite: BIOL 266, CHEM 375, or equivalent.
Examples from the current literature are used to discuss what is known about how the membranes of biological organisms are assembled and the roles that these membranes play in a number of important processes. Emphasis is placed on the transport of proteins to and through biomembranes and the roles that membranes play in metabolite and ion transport. Where applicable, the significance of these processes is illustrated by examining the roles of membranes in health and disease. Lectures only.
Note: Students who have received credit for CHEM 671 may not take this course for credit.
CHEM 677 Enzyme Kinetics and Mechanism
Prerequisite: CHEM 271, 375, or equivalent.
This course explores steady-state kinetics, including such topics as the use of initial velocity studies and product inhibition to establish a kinetic mechanism; nonsteady-state kinetics, isotope effects, energy of activation, and the detailed mechanisms of selected enzymes. Lectures only.
CHEM 678 Protein Engineering and Design
Prerequisite: CHEM 271, 375, or equivalent.
This course examines the principles behind protein design, how techniques of protein engineering are used, and the methods used to assess protein properties. Examples include studies of protein stability, structure-function relationships, and applications to drug design. Lectures only.
Topics in Instrumentation
CHEM 690 Selected Topics in Instrumentation
This course explores themes within the area of Instrumentation.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. CHEM 690A, CHEM 690B, etc.
CHEM 691 Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy
Prerequisite: CHEM 222, 393, or equivalent.
This course is designed to provide the background in magnetic resonance theory necessary to understand modern high-resolution NMR experiments and instrumentation. The basic theory in the introductory section also applies to electron spin resonance (ESR). Relaxation and through-bond and through-space interactions, and experiments to investigate them are considered. Spin manipulations and behaviour in multiple-pulse, Fourier transform NMR techniques used for common spectral editing and two-dimensional experiments are discussed. Lectures only.
CHEM 692 Experimental Protein Chemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 477 or equivalent or permission of the Department.
This “hands on” course introduces students to the common techniques used to study the structure and function of proteins and other macromolecules. Techniques covered include circular dichroism spectroscopy, fluorescence, UV/Vis spectroscopy, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, isothermal titration microcalorimetry, analytical ultracentrifugation, and protein crystallization/X-ray crystallography. The course includes theory, applications of the technique to the study of protein structure and function, and basic practice experiments to become familiar with the instrument and data analysis. For some of the techniques covered hands-on use will be limited. Each student is required to carry out a project on his/her own protein of interest. Each participant asks a specific question about a protein and then uses the techniques covered in the course to address the question. Lectures and laboratory.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a CHEM 690 number may not take this course for credit.
Theses, Seminars, Comprehensive Exam and Special Courses
CHEM 667 PhD Literature/Topic Seminar
CHEM 668 PhD Research Seminar
CHEM 856 Doctoral Research and Thesis (72 credits)
CHEM 896 Research Proposal and Comprehensive Examination (9 credits)
CHEM 655 - Master's Research and Thesis (33 credits);
CHEM 666 - MSc Seminar (3 credits).
This course provides an opportunity for the student to prepare and present materials concerning their current research problem in an area of chemistry or biochemistry to a critical audience. It is designed to give students practice at communicating and defending their ideas on a research topic in a professional forum, and should successfully inform a broad audience of chemists and biochemists.
With permission from their supervisory committee, students are allowed to take graduate level courses from other departments relevant to their research problems, as partial fulfillment towards their degree requirements.
Thesis. Students will work on a research topic under the direction of a faculty member and present an acceptable thesis at the conclusion. CHEM 655 - Master's Research and Thesis will be examined by the student's supervisory committee before being accepted by the department. Students may submit a manuscript-based thesis following the guidelines outlined in the section on Thesis Regulations in this calendar. In addition, an oral examination will be conducted before a committee of the department to test the student’s ability to defend the thesis.
Seminars. Each student is required to attend and participate in departmental seminars.
Research Areas. Areas for possible research are listed before the Doctor of/Doctorate in Philosophy section.
Cross-Registration. Students may, with the permission of their supervisory committee, cross-register for courses falling in the Topics categories in other Quebec institutions.
Academic Regulations
Academic Standing. Please refer to the Academic Standing section of the Calendar for a detailed review of the Academic Regulations.
Program Specific Requirements. Students must obtain an assessment grade point average (AGPA) of 2.70 based on a minimum of 6 credits.
Residence. The minimum residence requirement is one year (3 terms) of full-time study, or the equivalent in part-time study. The degree can normally be completed in two years (6 terms) of full-time study.
Time Limit. Please refer to the Academic Regulation page for further details regarding the Time Limit requirements.
Graduation Requirement. In order to graduate, students must have a cumulative GPA of at least 2.70.
Courses
Specific course offerings in subject areas listed under Topics will generally vary from year to year, depending on the availability of faculty and the requirements of graduate students in the program. In the MSc program, every student must complete CHEM 666 (Seminar); in the PhD program CHEM 668 (Seminar) and CHEM 896 (Research Proposal and Comprehensive Examination) must be completed by every student.
Courses are worth 3 credits unless otherwise indicated. Over the next few years the department will offer a selection of courses from those listed below. Additional Selected Topics courses may be offered in a given year, and these will be identified by different subtitles. Further information on Selected Topics courses will be available from the department at the beginning of each academic year.
Topics in Analytical & Bioanalytical Chemistry
CHEM 610 Selected Topics in Analytical Chemistry
This course explores themes within the area of Analytical Chemistry.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. CHEM 610A, CHEM 610B, etc.
CHEM 612 Analytical Separations
Prerequisite: CHEM 218, 312, or equivalent.
High performance liquid separations on an analytical (non-preparative) scale are surveyed. Fundamental separation mechanisms and application of the techniques are discussed. Emphasis is placed on separations of biologically relevant analytes which include peptides, proteins and nucleic acids. Lectures only.
CHEM 614 Modern Aspects of Practical Mass Spectrometry
Prerequisite: CHEM 494 or equivalent, previously or concurrently.
Theoretical and operational aspects of modern mass spectrometry are discussed in a number of formal lectures and training sessions. All students must carry out an independent mass spectrometry project on their molecules of choice. Projects can be selected from all areas of chemistry, biochemistry or biology including the “omics” sciences (e.g., proteomics, metabolomics).
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a CHEM 630 number may not take this course for credit.
Topics in Bioorganic & Organic Chemistry
CHEM 620 Selected Topics in Organic Chemistry
This course explores themes within the area of Organic Chemistry.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. CHEM 620A, CHEM 620B, etc.
CHEM 621 Physical Organic Chemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 222, 235; CHEM 324 or 325; or equivalent.
Determination of organic reaction mechanisms using kinetics, activation parameters, acid-base catalysis, Bronsted catalysis law, solvent effects, medium effects, isotope effects, substitutent effects, and linear free energy relationships. Lectures only.
CHEM 623 Organic Synthesis
Prerequisite: CHEM 222, 235, 324, or equivalent.
This course is concerned with synthetic strategy and design. It provides an introduction to advanced synthetic methods and reagents, involving heteroatoms such as sulphur, phosphorus, tin and selenium, as well as an overview of the uses of protecting groups in organic chemistry. The concept of retrosynthesis and a few asymmetric reactions are discussed using syntheses of natural products from the literature as examples. Lectures only.
CHEM 625 Nucleic Acid Chemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 221, 222, 271, or equivalent.
This course introduces students to various topics in nucleic acid chemistry. The topics include nomenclature, structure and function of RNA and DNA; techniques and methods to investigate nucleic acid structure; DNA damage and repair; interaction of small molecules and proteins with nucleic acid; oligonucleotide-based therapeutics (antisense, antigene, RNAi); synthesis of purines, pyrimidines and nucleosides; and solid-phase oligonucleotide synthesis. Lectures only.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a CHEM 620 number may not take this course for credit.
CHEM 626 Reactive Intermediates
Prerequisite: CHEM 324, 325, or equivalent.
This course offers an introduction to reactive intermediates with an emphasis on structure and stability as found in modern (physical) organic chemistry. While the focus is on radicals and carbenes, carbocations are discussed near the end of the term. The material covered is relevant to chemistry and biochemistry. Lectures only.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a CHEM 621 number may not take this course for credit.
CHEM 627 Supramolecular Chemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 324 or 325; CHEM 335; or equivalent; or permission of the Department.
This course reviews some fundamental aspects of synthetic and biological supramolecular chemistry and nanotechnology. Topics covered may include supramolecular forces, ion binding and ion channels, molecular recognition, self-assembly (meso-scale and molecular-scale), organometallic supramolecular chemistry, dynamic combinatorial chemistry (DCC), and foldamers. Lectures only.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a CHEM 620 number may not take this course for credit.
Topics in Physical Chemistry
CHEM 630 Selected Topics in Physical Chemistry
This course explores themes within the area of Physical Chemistry.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. CHEM 630A, CHEM 630B, etc.
CHEM 631 Computational Chemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 234, 241, 333, or equivalent; or permission of the Department.
This course presents the concepts, tools, and techniques of modern computational chemistry, and provides a very broad overview of the various fields of application across chemistry and biochemistry. The course is divided into two parts: 1) Molecular structure, which covers molecular mechanics and elementary electronic structure theory of atoms and molecules; and 2) Chemical reactivity, which covers applications of quantum chemistry and molecular dynamics techniques to studies of chemical reactions. The applications discussed include organic molecules and their reactions, peptides and proteins, drug design, DNA, polymers, inorganics, and materials. The course includes a practical component where students acquire hands-on experience with commonly used computational chemistry computer software. Lectures and laboratory.
CHEM 632 Non-equilibrium Thermodynamics
Prerequisite: CHEM 234 or equivalent.
In this course, the basic concepts of classical (equilibrium) thermodynamics are first reviewed, followed by an introduction to statistical thermodynamics which gives a unified method of treating transport processes. At this point, the Boltzmann distribution function is derived, which leads to the statistical interpretation of entropy. Other important thermodynamic functions such as the partition function, the partition function for large ensembles and the Sackur-Tetrode equation are examined. The course also addresses non-equilibrium thermodynamics in the linear domain. The relations describing the production of entropy in irreversible processes due to heat transfer, charge transfer, change of volume, and chemical reactions are examined. The establishment of flux equations and the use of the Onsager reciprocal relations are then applied to the description of a variety of open systems. Lectures only.
CHEM 633 Quantum Mechanics in Chemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 333, 431/631, or equivalent.
This course includes a thorough review of basic quantum mechanics in both the Schroedinger and Heisenberg representations, electronic structure theory, symmetry and group theory, interaction of matter with light, quantum scattering, the path integral formalism, quantum theories of chemical reaction rates, time-dependent approaches to spectroscopy, wave packet propagation, correlation functions and dynamics processes, and density matrices. Lectures only.
CHEM 635 Interfacial Phenomena
Prerequisite: CHEM 234, 235, or equivalent.
This course examines the physical chemistry of interfaces including surface and interfacial tensions, the absorption of surface active substances/surface excess properties, and surfactant self-assembly. Topics covered may include Gibbs and Langmuir monolayers, micelle formation, emulsions, foams, surfactant liquid crystals, layer-by-layer polymer self-assembly, and biological membranes. Techniques for characterization and applications (biological and industrial) of these systems are addressed. Lectures only.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a CHEM 630 number may not take this course for credit.
CHEM 638 Physics and Chemistry of Solid State Electronic Materials
Prerequisite: CHEM 234, 333, or equivalent.
This course essentially explores how electrical conductivity is influenced by the nature of the chemical bonding in these solid-state materials. The course provides an introduction to solid-state structures and then goes on to explore band theory, the central model used to describe electrical conductivity in the following three categories of electronic materials: conductors, semiconductors, and insulators. Finally the course explores the extension of the band model to interpret electrical conductivity in molecular semiconductors and charge-transfer complexes. Lectures only.
Topics in Bioinorganic & Inorganic Chemistry
CHEM 640 Selected Topics in Inorganic Chemistry
This course explores themes within the area of Inorganic Chemistry.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. CHEM 640A, CHEM 640B, etc.
CHEM 643 Organometallic Chemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 324, 341, or equivalent.
This course covers the structure and properties of organometallic compounds, their main reactions and their application in catalysis and organic chemistry. Lectures only.
CHEM 644 Physical Methods in Chemistry
This course provides an in-depth evaluation of the different methods used in modern physical chemistry such as laser, microwave, FT-IR, electron spin resonance, nuclear magnetic resonance, x-ray photoelectron, x-ray diffraction and fluorescence, Auger eletron, Mössbauer, and gamma-ray spectroscopic analysis, as well as scanning probe microscopy and mass spectrometry. Lectures only.
CHEM 645 Bioinorganic Chemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 241, 271, or equivalent.
Role of metals in biochemical systems. Essential trace elements, zinc enzymes, oxygen transport and storage, metalloproteins and biological electron transfer, structure-function relationships in heme enzymes, nitrogen fixation; model compounds for metalloproteins and metalloenzymes. Lectures only.
CHEM 646 Industrial Catalysis
Prerequisite: CHEM 234, 235, or equivalent.
Basic and recent concepts in catalysis are described with particular emphasis on heterogenous catalysis. The technical, economic and environmental aspects of industrial catalysis are covered. The processes to be studied are chosen from the petroleum industry, the natural gas and coal processing industry, and the production of thermoplastics and synthetic fibres. The course ends with a rapid survey of problems associated with the treatment of industrial pollutants and with catalytic converters. Lectures only.
Topics in Multidisciplinary Chemistry
CHEM 650 Selected Topics in Multidisciplinary Chemistry
This course explores themes within the area of Multidisciplinary Chemistry.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. CHEM 650A, CHEM 650B, etc.
CHEM 651 Nanochemistry
Prerequisites: CHEM 217, 218, 221, 222, 234, 235, 241, or equivalent.
This modular course covers the areas of production, characterization and applications of nanoscale structures and materials. Each module is taught by a different professor as well as guest lecturers. Topics may include (but are not limited to): size dependent properties, synthesis of organic and inorganic nanostructures, self-assembled structures, chemical patterning and functional nanopatterns, biomaterials. Nanometer scale fabrication techniques such as lithographic methods, nano-stamping and patterned self-assembly are discussed. Modern analysis techniques such as atomic force microscopy and electron microscopy, which are used to map and measure at the single molecule level are introduced. Applications such as photonics, optical properties, biodetection and biosensors, micro- and nano-fluidics, nanoelectronics and nanomachines are presented. The course includes a term project carried out using the nanoscience facilities held in the department research labs.
CHEM 658 Aquatic Biogeochemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 217, 218, 312, or equivalent.
The major aim of this course is to present a quantitative treatment of the variables that determine the composition of natural waters. Chemical equilibrium is the central theme of the course, but consideration is also given to kinetics, steady-state and dynamic models. Related themes include global chemical cycles, air and water pollution, as well as current research topics in water chemistry and chemical oceanography. Lectures only.
Note: Students who have received credit for CHEM 618 or for this topic under a CHEM 610 number may not take this course for credit.
Topics in Biochemistry
CHEM 670 Selected Topics in Biochemistry and Biophysics
This course explores themes within the area of Biochemistry and Biophysics.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. CHEM 670A, CHEM 670B, etc.
CHEM 676 Structure and Function of Biomembranes
Prerequisite: BIOL 266, CHEM 375, or equivalent.
Examples from the current literature are used to discuss what is known about how the membranes of biological organisms are assembled and the roles that these membranes play in a number of important processes. Emphasis is placed on the transport of proteins to and through biomembranes and the roles that membranes play in metabolite and ion transport. Where applicable, the significance of these processes is illustrated by examining the roles of membranes in health and disease. Lectures only.
Note: Students who have received credit for CHEM 671 may not take this course for credit.
CHEM 677 Enzyme Kinetics and Mechanism
Prerequisite: CHEM 271, 375, or equivalent.
This course explores steady-state kinetics, including such topics as the use of initial velocity studies and product inhibition to establish a kinetic mechanism; nonsteady-state kinetics, isotope effects, energy of activation, and the detailed mechanisms of selected enzymes. Lectures only.
CHEM 678 Protein Engineering and Design
Prerequisite: CHEM 271, 375, or equivalent.
This course examines the principles behind protein design, how techniques of protein engineering are used, and the methods used to assess protein properties. Examples include studies of protein stability, structure-function relationships, and applications to drug design. Lectures only.
Topics in Instrumentation
CHEM 690 Selected Topics in Instrumentation
This course explores themes within the area of Instrumentation.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. CHEM 690A, CHEM 690B, etc.
CHEM 691 Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy
Prerequisite: CHEM 222, 393, or equivalent.
This course is designed to provide the background in magnetic resonance theory necessary to understand modern high-resolution NMR experiments and instrumentation. The basic theory in the introductory section also applies to electron spin resonance (ESR). Relaxation and through-bond and through-space interactions, and experiments to investigate them are considered. Spin manipulations and behaviour in multiple-pulse, Fourier transform NMR techniques used for common spectral editing and two-dimensional experiments are discussed. Lectures only.
CHEM 692 Experimental Protein Chemistry
Prerequisite: CHEM 477 or equivalent or permission of the Department.
This “hands on” course introduces students to the common techniques used to study the structure and function of proteins and other macromolecules. Techniques covered include circular dichroism spectroscopy, fluorescence, UV/Vis spectroscopy, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, isothermal titration microcalorimetry, analytical ultracentrifugation, and protein crystallization/X-ray crystallography. The course includes theory, applications of the technique to the study of protein structure and function, and basic practice experiments to become familiar with the instrument and data analysis. For some of the techniques covered hands-on use will be limited. Each student is required to carry out a project on his/her own protein of interest. Each participant asks a specific question about a protein and then uses the techniques covered in the course to address the question. Lectures and laboratory.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a CHEM 690 number may not take this course for credit.
Theses, Seminars, Comprehensive Exam and Special Courses
CHEM 655 Master’s Research and Thesis (33 credits)
CHEM 666 MSc Seminar (3 credits)
SPAN 601 Discourse Analysis and Research Methods (3 credits)
SPAN 603 Introduction to the Pedagogy of Spanish (3 credits)
Twelve credits of elective courses may be chosen from the following list:
SPAN 605 Independent Study (3 credits)
SPAN 621-630 Topics in Applied Linguistics and the pedagogy of Spanish (3 credits)
SPAN 631-640 Topics in Spanish Translation (3 credits)
SPAN 641-650 Topics in Critical Thinking and Theory (3 credits)
SPAN 651-660 Topics in the Subject and Identity (3 credits)
SPAN 661-670 Topics in Exile and Marginality (3 credits)
SPAN 671-680 Topics in History of Ideas in the Hispanic World (3 credits)
SPAN 681 Research Seminar (3 credits)
SPAN 698 Topics in Current Research (3 credits)
Note 1: Subject matter in “topics” courses varies from term to term and from year to year. Details of the courses to be given together with their respective course contents will be available at the beginning of the academic year.
Note 2: In consultation with the Graduate Program Director, students may replace up to 6 credits of reading courses, or credits at the graduate level in another discipline. Permission of the Graduate Program Director of the respective program must also be granted. Interdisciplinary courses, where relevant to the student’s program, may include courses at the graduate level in the Departments of Communication Studies, Education, English, Études françaises, Philosophy, Sociology and Anthropology, and Religions and Cultures. Approval of courses from these departments will be sought on a per-case basis.
Note 3: Students who wish to concentrate in Pedagogy or Translation may take six credits at the graduate level in the department relative to their concentration.
Twenty-seven credits in:
SPAN 694 Thesis Proposal (3 credits)
SPAN 695 Thesis (24 credits)
OR:
SPAN 682 Research Paper I (12 credits)
SPAN 683 Research Paper II (15 credits)
Course Descriptions
SPAN 601 Discourse Analysis and Research Methods (3 credits)
This course is designed to provide both a broad theoretical introduction and concrete practice in the research and analysis of literary and cultural texts. Students consider, critique, and incorporate theory and criticism into the articulation and elaboration of an analytical essay. They also implement fundamental research practices such as performing bibliographical searches and documentation; implementing narrative, argumentative, and persuasive rhetorical strategies; and, finally, developing a rigorously defended and coherent argument.
SPAN 603 Introduction to the Pedagogy of Spanish (3 credits)
In this course, students learn and implement important aspects of teaching methodology and techniques. Opportunities for observation of Spanish classes are provided. Students apply the techniques learned in micro-teaching and peer teaching exercises. Assignments include lesson planning and the evaluation of teaching performance. This course will be offered in the first semester of every year. In order to integrate practice into the curriculum, an effort will be made to offer students an opportunity to teach an Introductory Spanish language course.
SPAN 605 Independent Study (3 credits)
Under the supervision of a faculty member, the student undertakes research in a defined topic related to the student’s interest and the faculty member’s field of specialization. A final research paper is required.
SPAN 621-630 Topics in Applied Linguistics and the Pedagogy of Spanish (3 credits)
The courses in this area address different theoretical aspects of Spanish pedagogy, such as learning theories, curriculum planning, interlanguage development, the teaching and learning of phonology, phonetics, grammar, and vocabulary acquisition.
SPAN 631-640 Topics in Spanish Translation (3 credits)
Courses in this thematic area will explore different theoretical aspects of translation, such as languages in contact (bilingualism, interpretation, Chicano/a literature, contrastive grammars), diachronic and synchronic linguistic variation and its representation in time and space, as well as provide students with the opportunity to practice their translation skills.
SPAN 641-650 Topics in Critical Thinking and Theory (3 credits)
Through the study of cultural discourses of the Hispanic world, this thematic area aims to improve the understanding and praxis of rational analysis and argumentation, as well as to examine the intimate relationship between linguistic/language theory and cultural analysis. Topics may include rhetoric, pragmatics and hermeneutics, as well as the analytical practices of a number of linguistic and literary theorists.
SPAN 651-660 Topics in the Subject and Identity (3 credits)
This area examines the artistic, literary and philosophical conceptualizations of subject and identity in the Hispanic world, including the problematics of gender, the (visual) image, the gaze, the body, etc. Topics may include the image of the gendered subject, analyses of dramatic works and film, the ‘visibility’ of the subject in the media, literature and/or paraliterature of a period and/or geographical area.
SPAN 661-670 Topics in Exile and Marginality (3 credits)
This thematic area examines exile as an epistemological, ontological, aesthetic, linguistic and political category within the Hispanic world. Courses may concentrate on writers and/or artists in exile, political and national identity, as well as gender issues in different eras and geographical spaces. Topics may include the examination of discourses of crisis in different eras: modernization; testimonio literature; the boom; the Chicano world and its reality; postmodernism/colonialism.
SPAN 671-680 Topics in History of Ideas in the Hispanic World (3 credits)
This area examines the philosophical and ideological bases of artistic expression in the Hispanic world, in its European, American and Asian contexts. Topics may include the Caliban/Ariel dichotomy in Latin America, the rhetoric of independence and revolution, modernity/postmodernity. Poetic and essayistic discourses of Spain and Spanish America form the corpus for this area.
SPAN 681 Research Seminar (3 credits)
Students meet with peers and faculty for discussion and presentation of their current research.
SPAN 682 Research Paper I (12 credits)
Under the supervision of a faculty member, students undertake a substantial research project, to be completed by the preparation of a research paper.
SPAN 683 Research Paper II (15 credits)
Under the supervision of a faculty member, students undertake a research project, to be completed by the preparation of a research paper.
SPAN 694 Thesis Proposal (3 credits)
Under the supervision of a thesis supervisor, the student writes a proposal presenting a research topic, whose overall goal is to demonstrate that the student is capable of undertaking an independent research project. In the proposal, the student provides: 1) the linguistic, cultural or literary phenomenon or corpus to be studied; 2) a critical and theoretical framework for the study; and 3) a preliminary bibliography. This proposal is submitted to the thesis director and Graduate Program Director for consideration.
SPAN 695 Thesis (24 credits)
The thesis consists of the formulation and presentation of the research results. Each thesis is examined by a committee consisting of the student’s supervisor and at least two other scholars from the department and/or scholars from relevant disciplines in other departments or institutions.
SPAN 698 Topics in Current Research (3 credits)
When offered, content will depend on the theme designated by the program.Students may re-register for this course, provided that the course content has changed. Change in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number.
COMS 800 Integrative Seminar (3 credits)
This course proposes to engage first-year students in an epistemological conversation concerning different approaches to the conceptualization of communication and to the range of research problematics elaborated in the field and in the program. The expected outcomes include: a broad understanding of the relations between different domains within the discipline; the ability to recognize the links between epistemological assumptions, theory construction, the formation of research problematics and methodological approaches; a familiarization with the main fields of strength within the program; and the development of the ability to engage in dialogue with colleagues in different domains of research.
COMS 835 Doctoral Pro-Seminar (3 credits)
Note: Students who have received credit for COMS 830 may not take this course for credit.
Elective Courses
COMS 805 Research Workshop (3 credits)
This research workshop is supervised by the student’s thesis director and is intended to respond to a particular need unfulfilled by the program. It can take various forms, namely a directed readings program, a specific project within a research group, an elective course (including a masters level course) or a research or creation internship. The research workshop must be defined in a specific agreement between the thesis supervisor and the student, which is approved by the program director and added to the student’s file.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a COMS 805 number may not take this course for credit.
COMS 822 Advanced Seminar in Research Methods I (3 credits)
This course provides an in-depth analysis of methodological problematics. Major contemporary methods of analysis are considered. Possible themes include research design, data-gathering techniques and instruments, and qualitative or quantitative procedures for data analysis. Specific topics may vary from year to year.
COMS 823 Advanced Seminar in Research Methods II (3 credits)
Students who have registered for COMS 822 must register for COMS 823 when taking a second Advanced Seminar in Research Methods course.
* Topics vary and are determined by the Joint Program Committee.
COMS 841 Cultural Industries (3 credits)
This course examines commodification and industrialization processes as well as the dissemination and consumption of culture within contemporary social formations, while focusing on one or more sectors of the cultural industries. The analytical approach considers themes such as characteristics of merchandising cycles, work and market organization, symbolic and cultural specificity of cultural-industries products, and relationships between technological innovation and cultural form.
COMS 842 Media Reception (3 credits)
This course examines media reception. It explores different theoretical and methodological approaches to the study of individual group practices and cultural consumption. The course looks at case-study material drawn from specific media or media genres (e.g. popular music, soap operas, children’s programming). The seminar considers such approaches as media ethnography, focus-group research, audience research, life histories, and other context specific micro-social approaches.
COMS 843 Communication Policy (3 credits)
This course examines the history and development of state intervention and regulation of the media. It may focus on communication policy nationally or internationally. The course considers such issues as the role of public policy in the development of public media and the public sphere, models of regulation and deregulation, the relations between regulatory agencies and interest groups, and the position of communication policies within larger governmental structures.
COMS 844 Uses of Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs) (3 credits)
Observing usage of information and communication objects and technical devices allows us to understand the effect of technologies within society. This course explores different theoretical and methodological approaches pertinent to analyzing ICT usages. With respect to course discussions and papers, particular attention may be paid to the interaction between user and technical device; articulation between artifact user and creator; usage situation within the organizational context; embedding of political dimensions in technological design; usage micro-situations and macro-sociological issues. Some major research traditions may be introduced, namely, dissemination of artifacts, sociotechnical innovation, common practices and significations, pragmatic approaches, social and socio-political appropriation of usages.
COMS 851 Speech Communication (3 credits)
This course examines discourse as action. Forms of discourse considered may range from interpersonal communication to public address. Possible theoretical approaches include ethnomethodology, conversational analysis, rhetorical theory, and performance studies.
COMS 853 Discourse and Representation (3 credits)
The course examines discourse with respect to representation. It focuses on the structuring of knowledge and identity within sign systems. Emphasis may range from the cognitive and psychological to the social and cultural.
COMS 854 Discourse within Social Formations (3 credits)
This course examines discourse as social mediation. Possible themes include the interrelation of power and knowledge, the organization of culture through signifying practices, and the production of discourse and social institutions.
COMS 861 Organizational Culture (3 credits)
This course examines how cultural analysis can be brought to bear in understanding organizational life. To this end, a range of theoretical approaches are drawn upon, including conversational analysis, ethnography, ethnomethodology, symbolic interactionism, enactment theory, and socio-linguistics. Aspects of organizations such as norms, rituals, folklore, traditions, common ideals, ideologies, shared symbols, core values and interaction are given particular attention.
COMS 864 Communication and Change in Organizations (3 credits)
This course addresses a major question within organizations at both theoretical and practical levels. It focuses on issues of innovation or transformation in an organizational framework using various approaches (functionalist, critical, post-modern, constructivist, interpretative). This perspective is pertinent for analyzing the context and process of change within cultural or development organizations as well as private, public or charitable undertakings.
COMS 873 Identities and Cultural Exchange (3 credits)
Within the context of electronic, information, and market-globalization forces, traditional geopolitical borders have become porous and easily penetrable. This course focuses on the hybrid identities emergent and negotiated from cross-cultural engagements and transnational communication at the beginning of the 21st century. Curricular materials include theoretical readings, case studies, and audiovisual materials focused on bridging cultural and political gaps.
COMS 874 Globalization of Communication (3 credits)
This course examines the emergence of a global communication system. Possible topics include international information flow, the circulation of communication products and communication issues as they are reflected in international accords and debates, and the role of media in issues of cultural development, democratization, and resistance to globalization.
COMS 875 Technology and Organization (3 credits)
This course analyzes and critiques various theoretical approaches which account for the relationship between technology and organization. It also provides the grounds for a communicational reflection on phenomena associated with the presence of information and communication technologies within organizations.
COMS 876 Media Technology as Practice (3 credits)
This course examines relationships between theory and practice in the work of individuals and groups of media practitioners across a range of genres and working contexts. Analysis can focus on the organization of the workplace, the creative process and social forces influencing media praxis.
COMS 877 International Communication and Development (3 credits)
This course traces the history of the different paradigms related to communication and development. It proposes a critical analysis of the theoretical perspectives suggested in both Southern and Northern contexts. The topics considered include Canadian and foreign institutions, policies, and programs, the role of international fora, as well as globalization and development. Case studies may focus on a specific region of the world.
COMS 878 Communication, Conflict and Peace (3 credits)
This course examines the various ways in which discourses of war, conflict, and peace are constructed and relayed through the mass media and other forms of technologically-mediated communication. In particular, how do the inherent properties of different modes of communication intersect with larger discursive formations to reproduce dominant definitions and unquestioned categories of social knowledge related to issues of peace and conflict? What role do the media play in shaping our understanding of war and warfare? How does the internet contribute to promoting both conflict and peace? How is peace represented as an end state that is desirable; for whom is peace being constructed; and what are the kinds of actions being promoted or encouraged in the name of peace?
COMS 879 Human-Computer Interactions (3 credits)
This seminar examines human-computer interaction models and research in various fields of media communication; virtual worlds, e-commerce, distance education, sharing of knowledge and resources, adaptive technologies, systems intelligence and customization. Other topics include principles of interface design and assessment in cognitive ergonomics.
COMS 880 Communication Networks and Organization (3 credits)
This course examines and analyzes communication networks in a constructivist perspective with respect to two main “social-networks” traditions (anthropological and structural). It considers communication networks according to the themes explored by scholars in the field such as diffusion, social support and capital, organizational phenomena, social movements or ICTs. The seminar also includes methodological aspects of the study of communication networks, their emergence, and their transformation.
COMS 882 Communication, Democracy and Power (3 credits)
This course considers the communicative structure and performance of democracy within modern society. Attention is paid to the discursive resources available to perform and affect democracy, the constitution of democratic agents, the role of media in constituting and maintaining a public sphere, communicative strategies, norms of regulation and power, the performance of difference and various aspects of public culture.
COMS 883 History and Historiography of Media and Culture (3 credits)
This course examines the development of communication technologies and the media in comparative and historical perspective. Themes of time, space, place and power and their reconfiguration in relation to media and communication are given particular attention. Class members are encouraged to think about how they might engage in research on the history of media as part of their dissertation projects. To this end, historiographical issues are examined throughout the course, along with methodological consideration given to how one works with documentary and archival records.
COMS 884 Cultural Theory in Communication Studies (3 credits)
This course introduces students to cultural studies and its entwinement with the development of the field of communications. Key readings in Marxist approaches to culture, British Cultural Studies, and its US and Canadian variants are covered in the first half of the course. The remaining weeks expand the national and conceptual specificity of the “cultural studies tradition.” Topics include cultural and representational politics, issues of identity, resistance, hegemony, and ideology.
COMS 885 Popular Culture (3 credits)
This course focuses upon the political dimension of popular culture and the intellectual challenges it poses to scholarship. It concentrates upon the conceptual and historical aspects of the study of popular-cultural forms, their production and consumption, as well as their assessment. The course introduces key ideas and issues in popular-cultural studies, beginning with the rise of interest in mass culture during the late-19th and early-20th centuries. It also encounters modes of examining and understanding popular texts and sites of popular consumption. Issues of subjectivity, community, ideology, cultural hierarchies, and mass society are addressed.
COMS 886 Alternative Media (3 credits)
This course examines the array of alternative communication practices that inform social movements emerging from the margins. It focuses on the conditions of their effectiveness and mechanisms that facilitate or impede their success, such as the external social forces that influence their cooptation, commodification and evacuation of revolutionary potential.
COMS 887 Strategies and Styles in Communication (3 credits)
This course considers the strategies and styles of communication as intentional symbolic activity. Communication is examined as a practice that responds to and transforms situations and contexts. Emphasis is placed on the form, manner, and consequences of such practices, as well as on the major paradigms informing different approaches to the study of discourse and mediated messages.
COMS 888 Discourses of the Body (3 credits)
Critical theorists have identified the body as a site of competing and multiple discourses. The course examines some of the ways in which different bodies have been constructed in the media and how these both constrain and provide latitude for the expression of identities. A central area of inquiry is the context of the historical and contemporary terrain that informs the expression and categorization of these identities.
COMS 889 Theories of Organizational Communication (3 credits)
This course surveys and juxtaposes how some of the main approaches to organizational studies have dealt with issues related to communication. Paradigms considered may include scientific management, human relations, cybernetics, political economy, rational decision making, cultural studies, feminism, and post-modernism. An effort is made to examine how these various approaches emerged historically in relation to shifting patterns of power, inequality, and technological change. Issues such as the nature of bureaucracy, domination and resistance, systematically distorted communication, and public relations/external communication are addressed.
COMS 891 Communication Technologies and Society (3 credits)
This course introduces students to and contextualizes the main paradigms with respect to research on social, economic and cultural aspects of information and communication technologies. Critical analysis focuses on their epistemological assumptions and premises, main categories of analysis, and privileged issues. Attention is paid to the political economy of the information system.
COMS 892 Epistemology and Methodology of Media Creation (3 credits)
This seminar seeks to develop a position of poiesis (production) and to differentiate it from the position of aisthesis (reception). In order to define the multiple aspects of media creation, the following themes are discussed: creationistic accounts and theses; the spectacle as ritual, achievement and imitation of reality; agents, machines and living organisms; functions of transmitting information and storytelling. Operational concepts considered may include granularity, linearity, interactivity, diegesis, spatialization, indexicalization and enunciation.
COMS 893 Advanced Seminar in Special Topics in the PhD in Communication (3 credits)
This seminar permits the in-depth examination of particular special topics in media and communication. Topics vary from year to year.
Examinations and Thesis Work
COMS 815 Doctoral Examination (3 credits)
COMS 890 Doctoral Thesis Proposal (6 credits)
COMS 896 Doctoral Thesis Research (63 credits)
COMS 695 Thesis (21 credits)
Prerequisite: COMS 694.
The thesis is researched and written in the Fall and Winter of the second year of study. It is submitted in written form and is between 20,000 and 25,000 words in length. The thesis format must be commensurate with Graduate Studies regulations and in a format stipulated by the rules of the Thesis Office. The thesis submission normally follows the graduate academic calendar dates. The thesis is defended in an oral examination.
COMS 697 Research-Creation Thesis (21 credits)
Prerequisite: COMS 694.
Specifically designed for students with significant media production experience. During the Fall and Winter of the second year of study, students choosing Option III undertake a Research-Creation Thesis that deploys one or more media forms. The Research-Creation Thesis is comprised of an original media production or prototype in any genre, and a 10,000 word document comprising a literature and media review, a theoretical and methodological contextualization, a critical reflection on the research-creation and its outcomes, and other areas of analysis as deemed necessary by the student and the student’s Thesis Committee. The thesis submission normally follows the graduate academic calendar dates. The thesis is defended in an oral examination.
COMS 698 Major Research Paper (15 credits)
Prerequisite: COMS 600, 605, 610, plus 21 elective credits.
The Major Research Paper is an extended essay/project equivalent to 10,000 words on a topic chosen in consultation with a full-time faculty member. The Major Research Paper may commence from topics and materials from previous courses, it may involve a sustained literature review of a specific issue or problem, or it may be a thematic investigation of a topic pertaining to media or communication studies. With permission of the supervisor and the Graduate Program Director, the Major Research Paper may include a research-creation component. This course is available only to those registered in Option IV, is normally taken in term five, and may not be taken concurrently with other courses.
Note: Students who have received credit for COMS 695 or 697 may not take this course for credit.
ECON 805 Doctoral Comprehensive Examination (6 credits)
ECON 806 Doctoral Research Seminar (6 credits)
ECON 807 Doctoral Thesis (48 credits)
ECON 814 Workshop in Advanced Economic Theory
Prerequisite: Permission of the department.
The workshop is designed for PhD students who have successfully completed their comprehensive examinations and have expressed an interest in Economic Theory. The course involves lectures by participating faculty members and continues with presentations by students. These presentations may involve the student’s own work or an already published paper of great importance to the literature. Topics vary from year to year, with some years devoted to micro-topics and others to macro-topics.
Note: Students who have received credit for this course under ECON 614 may not take this course for credit.
ECON 817 Advanced Macro Theory
Prerequisite: ECON 616.
The course deals with the New Classical and New Keynesian macroeconomics, rational expectations and disequilibrium approaches. Emphasis is placed on model solution techniques, optimal control theory, and stochastic processes. Recent developments in empirical estimation will also be dealt with.
Note: Students who have received credit for ECON 617 may not take this course for credit.
ECON 858 Montreal Natural Resources and Environmental Economics Workshop
Prerequisite: Permission of the department.
This workshop, which is organized through the Centre Interuniversitaire de Recherche en Economie Quantiative (CIREQ), is intended for researchers and doctoral students in economics throughout Montreal who are interested in resource and environmental economics. The types of topics that may be dealt with, at an advanced level, are the economic theory of sustainable growth, green accounting, sunk costs and production constraints in natural resource exploitation, the irreversibility of environmental investment decisions, measures of biodiversity and their implications, the optimal order of extraction of natural resources, intertemporal depletion of spatially distributed nonrenewable resources, property rights and natural resource exploitation, applications of differential games to natural resource and environmental economics, and other related topics. The workshop is led by a team of researchers comprising professors from McGill University, Concordia University, Université de Montréal and HEC Montréal who will actively participate in each meeting. A regular and active participation is expected of the doctoral students and other researchers who would like to join this work group.
ECON 878 Workshop in Labour Economics
Prerequisite: Permission of the department.
The course covers topics related to specifying and estimating static and dynamic models of individual choice concerning education, occupation, labour supply, marriage, fertility, and immigration. Emphasis is placed on policy evaluation methods. The course covers both structural and nonstructural approaches. For each topic, theory, econometrics and applications are discussed. The course concludes with presentations by students of their on-going thesis work. The course is restricted to PhD students who plan to write a thesis in the field of labour economics. There is no textbook for this course. Instead, the course uses journal articles extensively to supplement the topics covered in the workshop.
ECON 703 Master’s Research Paper (21 credits)
Cognate Courses
In addition, graduate students in economics may be permitted to register for a limited number of courses offered in the MSc program in the John Molson School of Business. In all such cases, prior permission of the Department of Economics and the John Molson School of Business is required.
ECON 596 Natural Resource Economics (3 credits)
This course focuses on the problems of the finiteness of the natural resources base in Canada and in the world, and on an analysis of the demand for and supply of natural resources and energy. The course also discusses the economic aspects of a selected group of conservation measures (financial incentives, reallocation of property rights, regulation).
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a ECON 598 number may not take this course for credit.
EDUC 806 - Quantitative Methods (3 credits)
EDUC 807 - Qualitative Methods (3 credits)
EDUC 808 - Reporting Research (3 credits)
EDUC 809 - Advanced Issues in Education (3 credits)
9 credits of elective courses
EDUC 890 - Comprehensive Examination (12 credits)
Each candidate must successfully complete EDUC 890 before being admitted to candidacy for the degree. The comprehensive consists of a written and oral examination that tests the candidate on both general and area specific research. After successfully completing the comprehensive examination, the student is admitted to candidacy for the degree.
EDUC 891 - Doctoral Proposal (9 credits)
Note: the proposal is accepted only after the student is admitted to candidacy.
EDUC 895 - Doctoral Dissertation (48 credits).
A doctoral thesis is expected to make an original contribution to knowledge, and be presented in acceptable literary form.
Academic Regulations
Academic Standing. Please refer to the Academic Standing section of the Calendar for a detailed review of the Academic Regulations.
Residence. The minimum period of residence is two years (6 terms) of full-time study beyond the master’s degree, or the equivalent in part-time study. A minimum of one year of full-time study is highly recommended.
Time Limit. Please refer to the Academic Regulation page for further details regarding the Time Limit requirements.
Graduation Requirement. To graduate, students must have a cumulative GPA of at least 3.00.
Courses
Required Courses
Each course is worth 3 credits unless otherwise indicated.
EDUC 806 Quantitative Methods
Prerequisite: ETEC 641, or CHST 605 or permission of instructor.
This course builds students' capacity to conduct quantitative research in education at the doctoral level. It covers all topics related to experimental and quasi-experimental design and the application of univariate statistics to educational research problems. In doing so, the course addresses the basic theory underlying quantitative approaches, selection of an initial research question, the types of questions best suited to quantitative methods, managing and analyzing quantitative data, external and internal validity, reliability and objectivity. This course also provides opportunities to analyze quantitative data.
Note: Students who have received credit for EDUC 802 may not take this course for credit.
EDUC 807 Qualitative Methods
This course builds students’ capacity to conduct qualitative research in education at the doctoral level. It covers various types of qualitative research, such as ethnography, case studies, content analysis, and naturalistic observation. In doing so, the course addresses the basic theory and philosophy underlying qualitative approaches, selection of an initial research question, the types of questions best suited to qualitative methods, managing qualitative data, qualitative data analysis, and assuring the credibility and trustworthiness of qualitative data.
Note: Students who have received credit for EDUC 802 may not take this course for credit.
EDUC 808 Reporting Research
This course prepares students to report their research to various stakeholders of educational research, including funding agencies, other researchers, journal editors, policy makers, and the public. Students prepare various research-related documents, and provide peer reviews.
Note: Students who have received credit for EDUC 800 may not take this course for credit.
EDUC 809 Advanced Issues in Education
This seminar explores one or more complex issues of education that has implications for Applied Linguistics, Child Studies, Educational Studies, and Educational Technology. During the course, students explore the research and popular literature on the topic, critically examine the epistemological, sociological, and theoretical bases of the literature, and relate the lessons learned to their own proposed research projects.
Note: Students who have received credit for EDUC 801 or EDUC 805 may not take this course for credit.
EDUC 890 Comprehensive Examination (12 credits)
EDUC 891 Doctoral Proposal (9 credits)
EDUC 895 Doctoral Dissertation (48 credits)
Area Tutorials
The content and format of an area tutorial may vary from year to year, depending on the number of students and the availability of faculty members. All area tutorials involve directed reading, research, seminar presentations, and discussion sessions on selected topics within that problem area.
Area tutorials offered by the Department of Education fall into the following categories:
EDUC 810-824 Educational Technology Area Tutorials
EDUC 825-839 Child Studies Area Tutorials
EDUC 840-854 Educational Studies Area Tutorials
EDUC 855-869 Applied Linguistics Area Tutorials
Each course is worth 3 credits unless otherwise indicated.
EDUC 810-824 Educational Technology Area Tutorials
Area tutorials in Educational Technology are selected from topics related to the application of technology to education and training. These include Human Performance Technology (HPT); theory, development and research in educational media; distance education; educational cybernetics, systems analysis and design; and human resources development.
EDUC 825-839 Child Studies Area Tutorials
Area tutorials in Child Studies are selected from topics that focus on children’s typical and atypical learning and development (e.g., social or cognitive development), in a variety of settings and contexts (e.g., early childhood environments, schools, after-school programs, recreation and community settings, families and peers, special education environments).
EDUC 840-854 Educational Studies Area Tutorials
Area tutorials in Educational Studies consist of philosophical, historical, social psychological, sociological and anthropological aspects of education locally, nationally, and internationally. These may include, but are not limited to, comparative study or early childhood education thought and practice, multicultural education, policy and practice in diverse school settings, curriculum issues and indigenous knowledge, mediated learning environments, curriculum theory, moral education, issues of difference in sexual orientation, class, race, and gender.
EDUC 855-869 Applied Linguistics Area Tutorials
Area tutorials in Applied Linguistics consist of a variety of topics related to second-language learning and teaching. More specifically they may focus on interlanguage development; teaching of pronunciation; role of routinization in language acquisition; acquisition of second language vocabulary; teaching and learning of second language phonology.
APLI 604 Applied Language Studies (3 credits)
This course examines the different theoretical concepts and methods used to analyze and describe the linguistic structure of language, and explores ways in which these can be applied to the teaching of second languages. The course introduces students to the key concepts that characterize the different components of language, namely phonology, morphology, syntax and semantics, within an approach that recognizes that languages can be affected by the social, psychological, and pragmatic aspects of human behaviour.
APLI 621 Issues in Second Language Acquisition (3 credits)
Research in second language acquisition (SLA) is surveyed in this course. Students read, critique, and discuss a number of research reports and survey articles on topics including research techniques in SLA, individual differences believed to affect success in second language learning (e.g., age, motivation), the systematicity of learner language (interlanguage, developmental sequences), the influence of learners’ first language on the structure of their interlanguage, the development of general theories of SLA. The course concludes with a discussion of SLA research carried out in classroom settings.
APLI 660 Research Methods I (3 credits)
The principal aims of the course are to enable students better to evaluate reports of empirical research in the language sciences and to plan limited studies of their own. Emphasis is placed upon the logic of research designs, the nature of scientific proof, and the assumptions underlying data analytic procedures. Case studies of published research, readings and lectures illustrate the concepts of data, scales, models, sampling, theory, description, estimation and significance testing.
Cluster Courses
Thesis students take a minimum of one course from each cluster; non-thesis students take a minimum of two courses from each cluster.
Cluster A: Focus on Theory
APLI 623 Sociolinguistic Aspects of Bilingualism and Multilingualism
This course is an introduction to educational and sociolinguistic issues affecting the promotion and maintenance of individual and societal bilingualism, multilingualism, and multiculturalism. The societal consequences of being multilingual and multicultural and the perspectives of both students and educators in multilingual/multicultural language classrooms will be examined.
Note: Students who have received credit for APLI 642 may not take this course for credit.
APLI 624 Psycholinguistic Aspects of Second Language Acquisition
Prerequisite: APLI 660 (previously or concurrently).
This course examines issues in second language acquisition and bilingualism/multilingualism from a cognitive (psycholinguistic) perspective. The aim of the course is to familiarize students with basic psycholinguistic concepts of language representation and use, focusing on the learning of different aspects of language, the role of attention and memory in language acquisition, the development of language comprehension and production skills, and the cognitive consequences of bilingualism/multilingualism. Throughout the course, emphasis is given to understanding research methodologies used in psycholinguistic investigations.
Note: Students who have received credit for APLI 642 may not take this course for credit.
APLI 626 Variationist Second Language Acquisition
The acquisition of a second language is a process that is inherently variable due to factors such as the influence of the learner’s first language, the target language, extralinguistic variables, and other factors. This course examines the interplay of these variables, focusing on current research in variable second language acquisition and on the pedagogical implications and applications of this knowledge for second language teaching.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under an APLI 651 number may not take this course for credit.
APLI 627 Individual Differences in Second Language Acquisition
The course provides an overview of learners’ individual differences in cognitive, social, affective, and motivational variables and the role of those differences in second language teaching and learning. Course topics may include language aptitude, motivation, learning and cognitive styles, personality, and language learning strategies. The course offers a research-based framework for understanding how individual differences impact language learning for different learners in various learning contexts.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under an APLI 651 number may not take this course for credit.
APLI 634 Cross-Linguistic Influence
Prerequisite: APLI 604.
This course provides an overview of different perspectives that have been taken on the ways previously learned languages affect the learning of subsequent languages. Topics include: the contrastive analysis and error analysis approaches; avoidance; markedness; selective, bidirectional, and conceptual transfer; and factors affecting cross-linguistic influence among trilingual and multilingual speakers. Throughout the course, the implications for language teaching of the theoretical perspectives and empirical findings are considered.
Cluster B: Focus on Language
APLI 601 Phonological Aspects of Second Language Acquisition
Prerequisite: APLI 604 (previously or concurrently).
This course is an introduction to second language phonology, with emphasis on how theoretical knowledge and research can be applied to the teaching of pronunciation in traditional and computer-based environments. This course familiarizes students with the English sound system and associated phonetic phenomena, research in the development of second language phonology, and key concepts in phonemic representation, production and perception.
APLI 610 Teaching and Learning Second Language Vocabulary
Prerequisite: APLI 604 (previously or concurrently).
The course provides an overview of research perspectives on second language vocabulary acquisition. Topics include the characteristics of lexis, the structure of the mental lexicon, implicit and explicit learning, and issues in assessment. The course also outlines a research-informed approach to instruction: in addition to examining both old and new techniques for teaching vocabulary, it explores developments in corpus linguistics that are relevant to vocabulary instruction and materials design.
APLI 616 Pedagogical Grammar
Prerequisite: APLI 604 (previously or concurrently).
This course surveys the theoretical and empirical literature related to the teaching and learning of grammar in second language classrooms. Topics include the nature of pedagogical rules, the use of metalinguistic terminology, teachers’ knowledge and beliefs, learner characteristics, task types, and sequencing. Students also study a grammar structure in depth for which they subsequently develop, pilot, and critically evaluate a set of instructional materials.
APLI 636 Language Awareness
This course focuses on current research and practice in language awareness relating to language teaching and learning for a variety of learners in different contexts. Topics may include the learning of first, second and additional languages, language teaching methodology, language teacher education, attitudes towards language, cross-linguistic and cross-cultural awareness, and critical language awareness. Throughout the course, emphasis is placed on both the theoretical and practical implications of language awareness.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under an APLI 651 number may not take this course for credit.
APLI 643 Pragmatics and Second Language Acquisition
The course provides an overview of pragmatics, which includes topics ranging from reference, implicature, presupposition, speech acts, information structure, and conversational structure. The course also provides a research-informed approach to the study of these topics in second language learning contexts, exploring developments in second language research that are relevant to the understanding of pragmatics.
Cluster C: Focus on Pedagogy
APLI 625 Second Language Speaking and Listening
The course provides an overview of several topics in second language listening and speaking such as fluency, formulaic language, strategies, and inferencing. The course provides a research-informed approach to second language listening and speaking, exploring trends in second language acquisition research and pedagogy that are relevant to the understanding of skill development.
APLI 630 Second Language Syllabus Design and Curriculum Planning
The aims of the course are to examine the evolution of the syllabus in second language teaching and to consider issues related to the development, planning and implementation of language programs in a range of educational settings. Topics include the history of second language teaching; current issues in pedagogical practice; assessment of student needs; and the design, sequencing, and evaluation of language teaching materials.
Note: Students who have received credit for APLI 638 may not take this course for credit.
APLI 635 Language Assessment
The course provides an overview of theory and research that informs language testing. Students explore historical developments in language assessment as well as current trends. The course enables them to critically evaluate a range of test types including standardized placement instruments, diagnostic tests, progress/achievement measures, and non-traditional assessment techniques. Students are guided in designing sample tests; they are also familiarized with established methods for analyzing test items and interpreting results.
APLI 644 Technology in Language Learning
This course explores theoretical and applied issues related to the use of technology in second language learning and teaching. The principal aims of the course are to enable students to critically evaluate existing instructional uses of technology and to design methodologically sound technology-based materials for second language teaching. Emphasis is placed on developing skills needed for the integration of instructional technology into second language instruction.
APLI 646 Literacy (3 credits)
This course examines the development of reading and writing abilities in a second language, including the connections between the two. It discusses literacy issues pertaining to different age groups and proficiency levels, including university students acquiring advanced academic writing skills. Throughout the course, the implications for language teaching of the different theoretical and empirical findings will be considered.
APLI 647 Supervision of Practice Teaching
This course is designed for students who have some ESL teaching experience and a particular interest in working in the field of teacher training. The course has both a practical and a theoretical component. In the practical component, students observe and assist novice ESL teachers; in the theoretical component, students meet weekly in an academic seminar.
Elective Courses
Each year the department offers a selection of courses from those listed below. All courses are worth 3 credits unless otherwise noted.
APLI 641 Research Methods II
Prerequisite: APLI 660.
The principal aims of the course are to enable students to evaluate the statistical information provided in reports of empirical research in the social sciences and use statistics in small scale studies. Emphasis is placed upon the logic of statistical tests, the assumptions underlying their use, and the interpretation of the results. The course also includes basic elements of data analysis and synthesis in research employing qualitative methodologies.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under an APLI 651 number may not take this course for credit.
APLI 651 Special Topics in Applied Linguistics
This course provides an advanced treatment of specialized literature in an area of Applied Linguistics.
APLI 671 Reading Course in Applied Linguistics I
APLI 672 Reading Course in Applied Linguistics II
APLI 673 Reading Course in Applied Linguistics III
APLI 674 Reading Course in Applied Linguistics IV
APLI 675 Reading Course in Applied Linguistics V (6 credits)
Thesis
APLI 690 Thesis Proposal (3 credits)
APLI 691 Thesis (18 credits)
APLI 696 Research Paper (12 credits)
CHST 695 Internship Seminar and Field Placement (9 credits)
Prerequisite: CHST 605 and CHST 606, or equivalent.
The internship is designed to provide students with the opportunity to investigate an applied problem or topical issue in child studies. Course requirements include a seminar in both terms. In the first term, students are required to keep a journal, conduct on-site observations, and formulate a written proposal for the internship project. In the second term, students will conduct their project and maintain their journal. Students are required to spend a minimum of 75 hours in the field placement in the first term and an additional 125 hours (minimum) in their second term.
CHST 696 Internship Report (9 credits)
The final report is a detailed record of the internship project and includes a description and analysis of all work produced for the field placement. In addition, all instruments, curricular materials, journal entries, and other supporting documents are included in the final report.
Thesis Option
CHST 697 Thesis Proposal (3 credits)
Under the supervision of a thesis supervisor, the student writes a proposal presenting a research topic; the overall goal of which is to demonstrate that the student is capable of undertaking an independent research project.
CHST 698 Research and Thesis (18 credits)
The thesis consists of the formulation and presentation of the research results which are then defended before a committee consisting of the student’s supervisor and at least two other scholars from the department and/or scholars from relevant disciplines in other departments or institutions.
ESTU 690 Thesis and Tutorial (21 credits)
ESTU 692 Directed Study (with Extended Essay or Research Project) (12 credits)
ETEC 613 Learning Theories (3 credits)
The primary goal of the course is for students to develop a critical understanding of classic and contemporary theories of learning, such as behaviourism, cognitivism, neo-cognitivism, and socio-constructivism as they inform instructional practice. Secondary course goals include enhancing students' abilities to: a) read and evaluate the primary literature in the area; b) present and write within the discipline; c) evaluate applications of theory to practice; and d) collaborate professionally including via computer conferencing.
ETEC 640 Research Methods I (3 credits)
This course provides an introduction to research methodologies germane to the field of educational technology.  Students acquire competencies in analyzing, synthesizing and evaluating empirical research that employ quantitative, qualitative and mixed methodologies.  Special emphasis is placed on acquiring skills to critique and review literature in educational technology.
Note: Students who have recieved credit for ETEC 548/648 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 641 Research Methods II (3 credits)
Prerequisite: ETEC 640.
The principal aims of the course are to enable students to evaluate the statistical information provided in reports of empirical research in the social sciences and use statistics in small scale studies. Emphasis is placed upon the logic of statistical tests, the assumptions underlying their use, and the interpretation of the results. The course also includes basic elements of data analysis and synthesis in research employing qualitative methodologies.
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 548/648 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 650 Fundamentals of Instructional Design (3 credits)
This course introduces students to instructional design, which refers to both the systematic process for preparing learning materials as well as to the theories and principles that guide that work. Working on a real-world project, students directly engage in the process and prepare an instructional program.
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 512/712 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 651 Fundamentals of Human Performance Technology (3 credits)
Prerequisite: ETEC 650.
Building on the base of instructional design, this course introduces human performance technology (HPT). HPT is a set of principles and methods for identifying and solving problems that cannot be solved through instructional programs alone.  Working on a real-world project, students design a variety of non-instructional interventions.
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 512/712 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 671 Administering Educational Technology Groups (3 credits)
This course prepares students to integrate into the real-world practice of educational technology and to eventually assume leadership positions in organizations.  Through readings, experiential learning activities, and other assignments, this course introduces students to the basic themes of administering educational technology groups:  (a) business management—successfully competing for work and resources needed to complete it; (b) project management—planning work and overseeing its progress; and (c) people management—establishing and managing expectations of, and relationships with, members of the group.
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 591/701 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 672 Project Management (3 credits)
This course focuses on project management and its application to the fields of education and training.  Special attention is placed on the different components of a project, but reviews of project management as a discipline, a process and a system are also undertaken. Following the established methodology proposed by national and international project management organizations, this course introduces the processes, skills, techniques and software tools required to effectively manage a project.  Specific educational examples and cases of real-life projects are included in the course to describe how project management techniques can be used in education and training.
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 594/704 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 673 Consulting Skills for Educational Technologists (3 credits)
Prerequisite: ETEC 650.
This course prepares educational technologists to adopt the consultative approach that is central to the profession. Specifically, this course develops the key competencies needed in consultative work in schools, higher education, workplace learning groups and non-profit organizations. These competencies include building awareness of the client organization, supporting clients in making effective choices, developing agreements with clients that include the scope, schedule and budget of projects, managing project communications and changes throughout a project, and interacting effectively with clients.
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 573 or for this topic under an ETEC 593/693 number may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 791 Internship (Non-Thesis Option) (15 credits)
ETEC 792 Internship Report (Non-Thesis Option) (3 credits)
ETEC 795 Thesis Proposal (3 credits)
ETEC 796 Thesis or Thesis-Equivalent (15 credits)
Elective Courses
The department currently offers the courses listed below. Each course is worth 3 credits unless otherwise indicated. The pattern of courses offered may vary from year to year. Detailed information on the courses offered in a given year is available from the department.
ETEC 607 Philosophical Issues in Educational Research
Note: Students who have received credit for ADIP 501 or ESTU 601 or ETEC 507 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 621 Educational Cybernetics
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 506/606 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 635 Principles of Educational Message Design
ETEC 636 Evaluation in Education and Training
ETEC 637 Educational Gaming and Modelling
ETEC 652 Knowledge Management
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 567/667 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 660 Introduction to Educational Computing
ETEC 662 Social Technologies and the Sociocultural Aspects of Learning
ETEC 665 Introduction to Digital Media in Education
ETEC 666 Comtemporary Use of Simulation in Training and Education
ETEC 669 Designing and Developing Interactive Instruction
ETEC 676 Human Resources Development
ETEC 680 Global Perspectives in E-Learning
Note: Students who have have received credit for ETEC 555/655 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 681 Fundamentals of Distance Education
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 592/702 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 690 Field Experience (for Option A-Thesis/Thesis-Equivalent only)
ETEC 691 Advanced Readings and Research in Educational Technology I
ETEC 692 Advanced Readings and Research in Educational Technology II
ETEC 693 Special Issues in Educational Technology
Cognate Courses
Graduate students in educational technology may be permitted to register for up to two elective courses (6 credits) offered in other graduate programs. In all such cases, prior permission of the Graduate Program Director is required.
ETEC 513 Learning Theories (3 credits)
The primary goal of the course is for students to develop a critical understanding of classic and contemporary theories of learning, such as behaviourism, cognitivism, neo-cognitivism, and socio-constructivism as they inform instructional practice. Secondary course goals include enhancing students' abilities to: a) read and evaluate the primary literature in the area; b) present and write within the discipline; c) evaluate applications of theory to practice; and d) collaborate professionally including via computer conferencing.
ETEC 550 Fundamentals of Instructional Design (3 credits)
This course introduces students to instructional design, which refers to both the systematic process for preparing learning materials as well as to the theories and principles that guide that work.  Working on a real-world project, students directly engage in the process and prepare an instructional program.
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 512/712 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 551 Fundamentals of Human Performance Technology (3 credits)
Prerequisite: ETEC 550.
Building on the base of instructional design, this course introduces human performance technology (HPT). HPT is a set of principles and methods for identifying and solving problems that cannot be solved through instructional programs alone. Working on a real-world project, students design a variety of non-instructional interventions.
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 512/712 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 571 Administering Educational Technology Groups (3 credits)
This course prepares students to integrate into the real-world practice of educational technology and to eventually assume leadership positions in organizations. Through readings, experiential learning activities, and other assignments, this course introduces students to the basic themes of administering educational technology groups: (a) business management—successfully competing for work and resources needed to complete it; (b) project management—planning work and overseeing its progress; and (c) people management—establishing and managing expectations of, and relationships with, members of the group.
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 591/701 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 572 Project Management (3 credits)
This course focuses on project management and its application to the fields of education and training. Special attention is made on the different components of a project, but reviews of project management as a discipline, a process and a system are also undertaken. Following the established methodology proposed by national and international project management organizations, this course introduces the processes, skills, techniques and software tools required to effectively manage a project. Specific educational examples and cases of real-life projects are included in the course to describe how project management techniques can be used in education and training.
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 594/704 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 573 Consulting Skills for Educational Technologists (3 credits)
Prerequisite: ETEC 550.
This course prepares educational technologists to adopt the consultative approach that is central to the profession. Specifically, this course develops the key competencies needed in consultative work in schools, higher education, workplace learning groups and non-profit organizations. These competencies include building awareness of the client organization, supporting clients in making effective choices, developing agreements with clients that include the scope, schedule and budget of projects, managing project communications and changes throughout a project, and interacting effectively with clients.
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 673 or for this topic under an ETEC 593/693 number may not take this course for credit.
Elective Courses
The department currently offers the courses listed below. Each course is worth 3 credits unless otherwise indicated. The pattern of courses offered may vary from year to year. Detailed information on the courses offered in a given year is available from the department.
ETEC 507 Philosophical Issues in Educational Research
There are a number of important philosophical questions that lie behind the everyday practice of education research. The questions include: What does it mean to say that research in education is “scientific”? Is science (and, by extension, educational research) really value neutral and objective? What kinds of education research should count as legitimate? In the first part of the course, various definitions of science, for example, those of Karl Popper and Thomas Kuhn, and some influential critiques of the scientific enterprise are examined. In the second part of the course, some of the ongoing debates about appropriate research methods in education are analyzed.
Note: Students who have received credit for ADIP 501 or ESTU 601 or ETEC 607 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 521 Educational Cybernetics
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 506/606 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 535 Principles of Educational Message Design
ETEC 536 Evaluation in Education and Training
ETEC 537 Educational Gaming and Modelling
ETEC 540 Research Methods I
This course provides an introduction to research methodologies germane to the field of educational technology. Students acquire competencies in analyzing, synthesizing and evaluating empirical research that employ quantitative, qualitative and mixed methodologies. Special emphasis is placed on acquiring skills to critique and review literature in educational technology.
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 548/648 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 541 Research Methods II
Prerequisite: ETEC 540.
In this course students develop a proposal, design a pilot study to investigate a research problem, and later analyze the data. Projects may use quantative or qualitative methodologies.
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 548/648 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 552 Knowledge Management
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 567/667 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 560 Introduction to Educational Computing
ETEC 562 Social Technologies and the Sociocultural Aspects of Learning
ETEC 565 Introduction to Digital Media in Education
ETEC 566 Comtemporary Use of Simulation in Training and Education
ETEC 569 Designing and Developing Interactive Instruction
ETEC 576 Human Resources Development
ETEC 580 Global Perspectives in E-Learning
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 555/655 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 581 Fundamentals of Distance Education
Note: Students who have received credit for ETEC 592/702 may not take this course for credit.
ETEC 590 Field Experience
ETEC 593 Special Issues in Educational Technology
ENGL 800 Pro-Seminar I: Theory (3 credits)
This course is an advanced survey of literary theory, considering those thinkers whose work has been particularly influential for the discipline’s understanding of the nature and function of literature and its production. Figures to be studied may include Aristotle, Sidney, Nietzsche, Althusser, Lacan, Derrida, Barthes, Foucault, Deleuze, Irigaray, McLuhan, Badiou, Zizek, and Kristeva.
ENGL 801 Pro-Seminar II: Methodology (3 credits)
This course considers literary research under the aegis of a current or emergent methodological paradigm in the field e.g. Book History, Media Studies, Digital Humanities, Poetics, Psychoanalysis, Affect Theory, or Neuroaesthetics.
ENGL 802 Professional Development Workshops (1 credit)
The Department holds a series of workshops with the aim of introducing doctoral candidates to pertinent research, teaching, and professional expectations and enhancing career development. In order to graduate, all doctoral candidates must attend these workshops before the end of the sixth term. Master's students are also strongly encouraged to attend the relevant sessions since they are a constitutive component of graduate formation. If a student has attended a given workshop during his/her master's degree, he/she is exempted from that workshop.
Workshops are led by faculty members and organized by the Graduate Program Director on a monthly basis in anticipation both of key dates during the PhD program (e.g. external grant application due dates) and the future professional life of the doctoral candidate (e.g. academic job interviews). The course is graded on a pass/fail basis.
ENGL 890 Thesis Proposal (6 credits)
Students are admitted to candidacy for the PhD upon acceptance by their advisory committee of the written thesis proposal and its successful defence. The oral examination of the written thesis proposal normally takes place in the term following the writing of the field examinations.
ENGL 891 The Major Field Examination I (6 credits)
This course focuses broadly on the candidate’s primary area of specialization, covering major authors, genres, and issues and the pertinent canonical texts therein, in order to consolidate the necessary background knowledge for advanced literary research and teaching at the university level. In the examination, candidates are expected to demonstrate comprehensive knowledge of the designated field as well as an original, critical understanding of the field and its constitutive texts. The Department has established reading lists in nine broad areas of specialization that cover a variety of periods, nations, and subjects. These basic lists may be modified to suit the interests of individual candidates. A substitution of 20 per cent is permitted for all reading lists for the purposes of tailoring the lists to the interests of the student.  Such substitutions are to be determined by agreement between the student and the student's supervisor and are subject to approval by the Graduate Program Committee.
ENGL 892 The Sub-Field Examination II (6 credits)
This course is designed to cultivate a more specific area of inquiry that may include a body of literary texts in combination with readings in a particular set of methodological or theoretical problems to the end of developing a viable doctoral topic and composing a thesis proposal. The Sub-Field Examination list is established by the candidate in consultation with the doctoral supervisor and comprises approximately 60 items that are seen as directly relevant to the field in which the dissertation is oriented. It is divided into three sections: 1) approximately 20 literary texts; 2) approximately 20 theoretical/methodological texts; 3) approximately 20 texts drawn from adjacent and/or ancillary fields. By “text,” it means the number of poems or articles deemed by field specialists as sufficiently representative of an author's work or period. A text cannot appear twice on any of the lists, including that of the Major Field. The lists and texts are not exhaustive, but are meant to provide the student with the necessary initiation to sub-fields that help to clarify the direction and goals of the dissertation.
ENGL 895 Thesis Research (53 credits)
Doctoral students must submit a thesis based on their research and defend it in an oral examination.
Studies Courses (12 credits)
ENGL 801-804 Independent Study in English Literature
ENGL 601-604 Special Topics in English Literature
ENGL 605-609 Studies in Early English Literature and Medieval Literature
ENGL 610-614 Studies in Renaissance Literature
ENGL 615-619 Studies in Restoration and Eighteenth Century Literature
ENGL 620-624 Studies in Nineteenth Century Literature
ENGL 625-629 Studies in Twentieth Century Literature
ENGL 630-634 Studies in Poetry
ENGL 635-639 Studies in Drama
ENGL 640-644 Studies in Fiction
ENGL 645-649 Studies in the History of Ideas
ENGL 650-654 Studies in Shakespeare
ENGL 655-659 Studies in American Literature
ENGL 660-664 Studies in Canadian Literature
ENGL 665-667 Studies in Post-Colonial Literature
ENGL 668-669 Studies in Literary Criticism
ENGL 685-689 Studies in Selected Areas
ENGL 690 Thesis (24 credits)
ENGL 692 Creative Writing Thesis (21 credits)
ENGL 693 Bibliography (6 credits)
The annotated bibliography constitutes a preliminary phase of the research essay. A student must successfully complete the annotated bibliography before producing the research essay. The approximate length of the annotated bibliography is 3,000 words and is supervised by the supervisor of the research essay. The bibliography is assessed on a pass/fail basis.
ENGL 694 Research Essay (18 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGL 693.
A research essay of approximately 10,000 words is supervised by a member of the department and assessed by another faculty member acting as reader. The essay is assessed on a pass/fail basis.
FLIT 600 Méthodologie (3 crédits)
FLIT 601 Théories littéraires (3 crédits)
Séminaires de domaines généraux *
FLIT 605 Littérature et discours (3 crédits)
FLIT 614 Littérature et technologies (3 crédits)
FLIT 617 Textes et images (3 crédits)
FLIT 619 Littérature et société (3 crédits)
FLIT 620 Tutorat en littérature (3 crédits)
FLIT 621 Tutorat en littérature (3 crédits)
FLIT 622 Séminaire avancé en littérature, langue et traduction (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 622.
FLIT 630-639 Séminaire avancé en littératures francophones (3 crédits)
FLIT 640-649 Séminaire avancé en littérature québécoise (3 crédits)
FLIT 650-659 Séminaire avancé en écritures contemporaines (3 crédits)
FLIT 660-669 Séminaire avancé en littérature française (3 crédits)
Autres exigences
FLIT 690 Présentation du mémoire (OPTION A) (6 crédits)
FLIT 691 Présentation du mémoire incluant une réalisation médiatique (OPTION B) (6 crédits)
FLIT 692 Mémoire (OPTION A) (24 crédits)
FLIT 693 Mémoire incluant une réalisation médiatique (OPTION B) (24 crédits)
* Les séminaires de domaines généraux peuvent être suivis dans un autre département de l’Université Concordia ou dans d’autres universités, avec l’accord du directeur ou de la directrice du programme de deuxième cycle en littérature et celui du département concerné. Pour les deux options, un maximum de trois crédits de séminaires non obligatoires peut être remplacé par une lecture dirigée après l’obtention de la permission du directeur ou de la directrice du 2e cycle de littérature.
FLIT 600 Méthodologie (3 crédits)
Dans ce séminaire, l’étudiante ou l’étudiant apprend à formuler des problématiques et à discuter d’hypothèses de recherche. Les étudiants se familiarisent également avec les outils de recherche bibliographique imprimés et informatiques, les règles de présentation de la bibliographie et les principaux types de productions écrites liées à la critique littéraire.
FLIT 601 Théories littéraires (3 crédits)
Ce séminaire permet à l’étudiante ou à l’étudiant d’approfondir sa connaissance de diverses théories littéraires, en tenant compte des approches les plus classiques comme des plus récentes. Le séminaire vise également à explorer le passage de la théorie à la pratique dans l’analyse des textes.
FLIT 605 Littérature et discours (3 crédits)
Ce séminaire s’intéresse à l’interaction dynamique de la littérature avec les diverses formes de discours en circulation dans l’espace social.
FLIT 614 Littérature et technologies (3 crédits)
Dans ce séminaire, on réfléchit à l’impact des technologies sur la littérature. On y étudie les formes littéraires et artistiques nées de l'évolution récente des dispositifs de lecture et d’écriture, ainsi que les modes de diffusion inédits qui en découlent.
FLIT 617 Textes et images (3 crédits)
Ce séminaire est, pour l’étudiante ou l’étudiant, l’occasion d’étudier les rapports entretenus entre texte et l’image entendus dans leur sens large. Dans ce séminaire seront abordés des textes qui incorporent le visuel ou qui en dépendent, comme les textes littéraires illustrés et les bandes-dessinées.
FLIT 619 Littérature et société (3 crédits)
Ce séminaire est, pour l’étudiante ou l’étudiant, l’occasion de réfléchir à la sociologie littéraire, aux rapports entre l’œuvre et son public ou encore aux divers contextes de production, de diffusion, de réception ou de conservation du texte littéraire.
FLIT 620 Tutorat en littérature (3 crédits)
FLIT 621 Tutorat en littérature (3 crédits)
FLIT 622 Littérature, langue et traduction (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 622.
Le séminaire avancé de littérature, langue, et traduction vise à parfaire les connaissances de l’étudiante et de l’étudiant dans un domaine littéraire, traductologique ou linguistique spécifique envisagé sous un angle théorique, historique ou social. Pour animer ce séminaire, il sera fait appel aux professeurs du département en fonction de leur spécialité. Le sujet particulier du séminaire sera annoncé chaque fois que le séminaire sera donné.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FLIT 616 ou FTRA 616 ou FTRA 622 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FLIT 630-639 Séminaire avancé en littératures francophones (3 crédits)
Ce séminaire avancé vise à parfaire les connaissances de l’étudiante et de l’étudiant par une analyse en profondeur d’une thématique et d’un corpus particulier des littératures francophones.
FLIT 640-649 Séminaire avancé en littérature québécoise (3 crédits)
Ce séminaire avancé vise à parfaire les connaissances de l’étudiante et de l’étudiant par une analyse en profondeur d’une thématique et d’un corpus particulier de la littérature québécoise.
FLIT 650-659 Séminaire avancé en écritures contemporaines (3 crédits)
Ce séminaire avancé vise à parfaire les connaissances de l’étudiante et de l’étudiant par une analyse en profondeur d’une thématique et d’un corpus particulier des écritures contemporaines.
FLIT 660-669 Séminaire avancé en littérature française (3 crédits)
Ce séminaire avancé vise à parfaire les connaissances de l'étudiante et de l'étudiant par une analyse en profondeur d'une thématique et d'un corpus particulier de la littérature française.
FLIT 690 Présentation du mémoire (Option A) (6 crédits)
FLIT 691 Présentation du mémoire incluant une réalisation médiatique (Option B) (6 crédits)
FLIT 692 Mémoire (Option A) (24 crédits)
FLIT 693 Mémoire incluant une réalisation médiatique (Option B) (24 crédits)
FTRA 600 Méthodologie générale de la recherche en traduction (3 crédits)
Bloc B (9 cr. au choix)
FTRA 601 Courants contemporains en traductologie (3 crédits)
FTRA 602 Histoire générale de la traduction (3 crédits)
FTRA 603 Contextes socio-politiques de la traduction (3 crédits)
FTRA 610 Lecture critique de traductions (3 crédits)
FTRA 622 Littérature, langue, traduction (3 crédits)
Bloc C (3cr. au choix)
FTRA 636 Informatique et traduction (3 crédits)
FTRA 638 Initiation au sous-titrage (3 crédits)
FTRA 652 Traduction assistée par ordinateur (TAO) et post édition (3 crédits)
FTRA 655 Gestion de projets (3 crédits)
FTRA 658 Pratique de la localisation (3 crédits)
FTRA 668 Web, technologies, traduction : théories et critiques (3 crédits)
Bloc D (30 cr. obligatoires)
FTRA 611 Terminologie et mondialisation (3 crédits)
FTRA 612 Traduction avancée en sciences humaines et sociales (F) (3 crédits)
ou
FTRA 613 Advanced translation in social sciences and the humanities (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 614 Traduction littéraire avancée (F) (3 crédits)
ou
FTRA 615 Advanced literary translation (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 623 Traduction scientifique et technique du français à l’anglais (3 crédits)
ou
FTRA 624 Traduction scientifique et technique de l’anglais au français (3 crédits)
FTRA 625 Traduction commerciale et juridique du français à l’anglais (3 crédits)
ou
FTRA 626 Traduction commerciale et juridique de l’anglais au français (3 crédits)
FTRA 629 Révision et correction en traduction (A) (3 crédits)
ou
FTRA 630 Révision et correction en traduction (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 631 Initiation à la traduction générale (A) (3 crédits)
ou
FTRA 632 Initiation à la traduction générale (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 633 Aspects théoriques et pratiques de la terminologie (3 crédits)
FTRA 634 Traduction littéraire de l’anglais au français (3 crédits)
ou
FTRA 635 Traduction littéraire du français à l’anglais (3 crédits)
FTRA 647 Traduction économique du français à l’anglais (A) (3 crédits)
ou
FTRA 648 Traduction économique de l’anglais au français (F) (3 crédits)
Maîtrise en traductologie (théorique - avec mémoire) Option B
Le Département d’études françaises offre un programme de 2e cycle à visée théorique conduisant au doctorat : la maîtrise en traductologie, avec mémoire option B.
But du programme
Cette option offre une formation poussée favorisant la réflexion et l’acquisition de connaissances de pointe en traductologie aux étudiantes et aux étudiants qui ont réalisé leurs études antérieures en traduction ou dans une discipline proche de la traduction. Ces étudiants peuvent ainsi devenir des langagiers professionnels et poursuivre leurs études au doctorat.
Conditions générales d’admission
Les candidates et les candidats devront détenir un baccalauréat spécialisé (ou « Honours ») en traduction, un diplôme d’études supérieures en traduction, ou encore un baccalauréat ou un diplôme d’études supérieures dans un domaine pertinent à la traduction. Ils devront posséder les compétences linguistiques nécessaires à la traduction (maîtrise de la langue d’arrivée, compréhension fine de la langue de départ), avoir un excellent dossier universitaire (moyenne générale de 3 sur 4,3) et démontrer des aptitudes pour la traduction. La direction du programme pourra exiger qu’une candidate ou qu’un candidat suive au besoin une propédeutique.
La demande d’admission doit s’accompagner des pièces suivantes :
trois lettres de recommandation;
une lettre de présentation où la candidate ou le candidat décrit sa formation et son expérience dans les domaines langagiers ainsi que ses attentes à l’égard du programme;
des relevés de notes officiels de l’université ou des universités fréquentées.
La sélection des candidatures est effectuée sur la base des éléments suivants :
le dossier universitaire de la candidate ou du candidat;
les lettres de recommandation;
un examen d’admission qui vérifie les compétences linguistiques et culturelles de la candidate ou du candidat.
Rendement académique
Voir la section Academic Standing de l'Annuaire pour la Réglementation universitaire.
Toute note inférieure à C représente un échec. Le comité des études supérieures du Département revoit le dossier de chaque étudiante et de chaque étudiant tous les ans et peut exiger que celles et ceux dont les résultats ne satisfont pas aux normes du Département (moyenne générale de 3,0 sur 4,3) se retirent du programme.
Durée des études
La durée des études pour les étudiantes et étudiants à temps plein est d'un minimum de trois sessions et d'un maximum de douze sessions à partir de la date d'inscription. Pour les étudiantes et étudiants à temps partiel, le maximum est de quinze sessions.
Exigences du programme
Toute étudiante ou tout étudiant doit obtenir un minimum de 45 crédits.
Structure du programme
Toute étudiante ou tout étudiant est tenu à 15 crédits de séminaires, à 6 crédits de présentation du projet de mémoire et à 24 crédits de mémoire.
Séminaires obligatoires : 9 crédits
Séminaires à option : 6 crédits
Projet de mémoire : 6 crédits
Mémoire : 24 crédits
Séminaires
Les cours obligatoires sont des séminaires de fondement théorique et d’histoire de la traduction. Les cours au choix sont des séminaires spécialisés dans le domaine sociocritique et des séminaires de traduction en littérature et en sciences humaines.
Séminaires obligatoires (9 cr.)
FTRA 600 Méthodologie générale de la recherche en traduction (3 crédits)
FTRA 601 Courants contemporains en traductologie (3 crédits)
FTRA 602 Histoire générale de la traduction (3 crédits)
Séminaires au choix (6 cr.)
FTRA 603 Contextes socio-politiques de la traduction (3 crédits)
FTRA 610 Lecture critique de traductions (3 crédits)
FTRA 612 Traduction avancée en sciences humaines et sociales (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 613 Advanced translation in social sciences and the humanities (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 614 Traduction littéraire avancée (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 615 Advanced literary translation (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 622 Littérature, langue, traduction (3 crédits)
FTRA 680 Tutorat en littérature (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 681 Tutorial in literature (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 682 Tutorat en traduction (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 683 Tutorial in translation (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 684 Tutorat en linguistique (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 685 Tutorial in linguistics (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 698 Étude d’un sujet particulier / Special Topics (3 crédits)
Autres exigences (30 cr.)
FTRA 686 Projet de mémoire (6 crédits)
FTRA 692 Mémoire (24 crédits)
Nota : Les étudiantes et les étudiants admis en maîtrise peuvent bénéficier d’une aide financière pendant la durée de leurs études, sous la forme d’assistanats de recherche ou d’enseignement. Ces aides varient selon les années et les étudiantes et étudiants intéressés doivent se faire connaître auprès de la direction du programme une fois admis.
Cours et séminaires
FTRA 600 Méthodologie générale de la recherche en traduction (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 500.
Ce séminaire examine les principales méthodes et approches appliquées à l’étude de la traduction. Il trace l’émergence de la discipline autonome de la traductologie ainsi que ses liens actuels avec d’autres sciences humaines et sociales. À l’issue du séminaire, l’étudiante ou l’étudiant a une vue d’ensemble de la théorisation en traduction, ce qui lui permet de se spécialiser en connaissance de cause dans un domaine spécifique, en élaborant une problématique particulière cohérente avec les visées du programme et en empruntant les outils de recherche pertinents.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 500 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 601 Courants contemporains en traductologie (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 539.
Ce séminaire aborde les tendances qui marquent l’actualité de la recherche en traductologie. Sont explorées les nouvelles pratiques de la traduction et l’évolution des cadres conceptuels qui permettent de penser le transfert linguistique et culturel.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 539 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 602 Histoire générale de la traduction (3 crédits)
Ce séminaire est une introduction à l’histoire générale de la traduction, notamment (mais non exclusivement) en Occident, ainsi qu’à l’évolution des approches historiographiques. Une vue en coupe est présentée à travers des thématiques permettant de dégager le rôle historique joué par les traducteurs comme acteurs sociaux proches des pouvoirs en place ou critiques de ces pouvoirs. L’accent est mis sur la créativité des traducteurs à certaines époques clés de contacts entre des cultures. Le séminaire peut aborder certains domaines précis de la traduction et des travaux menés à des périodes historiques et dans des aires géographiques données.
FTRA 603 Contextes socio-politiques de la traduction (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 553.
Ce séminaire examine les situations sociales et politiques qui influent sur le travail pratique des traducteurs et la réception des traductions. Sont étudiés, par exemple,le cas des États bilingues ou multilingues, l'évolution des politiques linguistiques et leurs répercussions sur la traduction, les rapports entre les langues majoritaires et minoritaires, les effets de la migration sur les sociétés de plus en plus hybrides et les marchés nouveaux de la traduction.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 553 ou FTRA 550 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 610 Lecture critique de traductions (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 540.
Ce séminaire propose une étude critique des traductions de l’anglais au français et du français à l’anglais effectuées à travers l’histoire, en tenant compte de la diversité des visées esthétiques, des différentes stratégies de traduction, ainsi que des contraintes socio-politiques ou institutionnelles. L’accent est mis sur l’étude des « grandes traductions » dans les cultures d’expression anglaise et française.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 540 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 611 Terminologie et mondialisation (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 534.
Préalable : FTRA 533. Le cours porte sur certains points fins en terminologie et en terminographie modernes : synonymie, marques sociolinguistiques, néonymie, normalisation et internationalisation. Il traite spécifiquement du rôle de la terminologie dans la gestion de l’information unilingue et multi‑lingue dans les entreprises et dans les organismes nationaux et internationaux. L’aspect pratique prend, entre autres, la forme de rédaction de rapports de recherche et l’utilisation d’outils terminotiques. (F/A)
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 534 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 612 Traduction avancée en sciences humaines et sociales (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 613 Advanced translation in social sciences and the humanities (A) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 542 ou 543.
Ce séminaire pratique et théorique aborde plusieurs domaines des sciences humaines et sociales, notamment la sociologie, la psychanalyse, la théorie féministe. L’étudiante ou l’étudiant produit un commentaire analytique sur ses choix de traduction en s’efforçant de théoriser sa pratique de traducteur-traductrice. Le séminaire FTRA 612 a l’anglais comme langue de départ et le français comme langue d’arrivée (F); le séminaire FTRA 613 a le français comme langue de départ et l’anglais comme langue d’arrivée. (A)
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 542 ou FTRA 543 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 614 Traduction littéraire avancée (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 615 Advanced literary translation (A) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 544 ou 545.
Ce séminaire pratique et théorique analyse, à partir de théories littéraires contemporaines, un échantillon de textes à traduire. L’étudiante ou l’étudiant produit un commentaire analytique sur ses choix de traduction en s’efforçant de théoriser sa pratique de traducteur-traductrice. Le séminaire FTRA 614 a l’anglais comme langue de départ et le français comme langue d’arrivée (F), le séminaire FTRA 615 a le français comme langue de départ et l’anglais comme langue d’arrivée. (A)
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 544 ou FTRA 545 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 622 Littérature, langue, traduction (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FLIT 622.
Le séminaire avancé de littérature, langue et traduction vise à parfaire les connaissances de l’étudiante et de l’étudiant dans un domaine littéraire, traductologique ou linguistique spécifique envisagé sous un angle théorique, historique ou social. Pour animer ce séminaire, il sera fait appel aux professeurs du département en fonction de leur spécialité. Le sujet particulier du séminaire sera annoncé chaque fois que le séminaire sera donné.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 616, FLIT 616 ou FLIT 622 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 623 Traduction scientifique et technique du français à l’anglais (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 513.
Initiation aux différents problèmes de la traduction dans les langues de spécialité scientifiques et techniques (français-anglais). Le cours est divisé en deux ou trois parties, chaque partie correspondant à un domaine spécialisé en traduction (A).
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 513 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 624 Traduction scientifique et technique de l’anglais au français (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 514.
Initiation aux différents problèmes de la traduction dans les langues de spécialité scientifiques et techniques (anglais-français). Le cours est divisé en deux ou trois parties, chaque partie correspondant à un domaine spécialisé en traduction (F).
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 514 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 625 Traduction commerciale et juridique du français à l’anglais (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 515.
Initiation aux différents problèmes de la traduction dans les langues de spécialité de l’administration, du commerce et du droit (français-anglais). Le cours est divisé en parties, chaque partie correspondant à un domaine spécialisé en traduction (A).
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 515 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 626 Traduction commerciale et juridique de l’anglais au français (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 516.
Initiation aux différents problèmes de la traduction dans les langues de spécialité de l’administration, du commerce et du droit (anglais-français). Le cours est divisé en parties, chaque partie correspondant à un domaine spécialisé (F).
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 516 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 629 Révision et correction en traduction (A) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 529.
Ce cours aborde les différentes méthodes de révision et de correction de textes rédigés ou traduits en anglais; il sensibilise les étudiantes et étudiants aux aspects humains et techniques du métier de réviseure et de réviseur; on touche aussi aux problèmes de l’évaluation de la qualité des traductions (A).
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 529 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 630 Révision et correction en traduction (F) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 530.
Ce cours aborde les différentes méthodes de révision et de correction de textes rédigés ou traduits en français; il sensibilise les étudiantes et étudiants aux aspects humains et techniques du métier de réviseure et de réviseur; on touche aussi aux problèmes de l’évaluation de la qualité des traductions (F).
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 530 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 631 Initiation à la traduction générale (A) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 531.
Ce cours vise à initier les étudiantes et étudiants aux outils notionnels et linguistiques nécessaires pour traduire efficacement des textes d’ordre général. Il leur présente aussi les étapes du processus de la traduction et les familiarise avec les outils de travail de la traduction.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 531 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 632 Initiation à la traduction générale (F) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 532.
Ce cours vise à initier les étudiantes et étudiants aux outils notionnels et linguistiques nécessaires pour traduire efficacement des textes d’ordre général. Il leur présente aussi les étapes du processus de la traduction et les familiarise avec les outils de travail de la traduction.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 532 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 633 Aspects théoriques et pratiques de la terminologie (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 533.
Principes généraux de la terminologie; distinction entre langue générale et langues de spécialité; rapport entre documentation et terminologie; analyse terminologique; terminologie de traduction; supports terminographiques traditionnels et/ou informatisés; terminologie et aménagement linguistique.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 533 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 634 Traduction littéraire de l’anglais au français (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 504.
Sensibilisation aux problèmes spécifiques à la traduction littéraire. Travaux pratiques : traduction de textes de genres variés (F).
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 504 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 635 Traduction littéraire du français à l’anglais (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 501.
Sensibilisation aux problèmes spécifiques à la traduction littéraire. Travaux pratiques : traduction de textes de genres variés (A).
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 501 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 636 Informatique et traduction (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 536.
Ce cours porte sur la langue de l’informatique, la théorie et les concepts fondamentaux qui s’y rapportent. Il comporte des exercices de traduction et une initiation aux outils informatisés pour les traducteurs : Internet, bases de données, systèmes de traduction assistée,utilitaires. (F/A)
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 536 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 638 Initiation au sous-titrage (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 538.
Ce cours a pour but d’initier les étudiantes et étudiants à la traduction audiovisuelle, en particulier au sous-titrage. Il comporte un volet théorique, avec lectures et analyses, ainsi qu’un volet pratique où sont traités les principes et les conventions du sous-titrage, les aspects techniques et les genres cinématographiques. Sont aussi abordées la traduction de la voix hors-champ et les techniques d’accessibilité tels le sous-titrage pour malentendants et l’audiodescription.
FTRA 647 Traduction économique du français à l’anglais (A) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 547.
Sensibilisation aux problèmes que pose dans le domaine de l’économie la traduction du français à l’anglais. (A)
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 547 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 648 Traduction économique de l’anglais au français (F) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 548.
Sensibilisation aux problèmes que pose dans le domaine de l’économie la traduction de l’anglais au français. (F)
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 548 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 652 Traduction assistée par ordinateur (TAO) et post édition (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 552.
Préalable : FTRA 536 pour le diplôme en traduction.
Ce cours permet d’analyser les aspects morphologiques, lexicaux, syntaxiques et sémantiques des systèmes de traduction automatisée. L’étudiante et l’étudiant apprennent à appliquer les concepts analysés à un système commercialisé. Ils font des exercices simples de programmation portant sur des problèmes linguistiques; ils utilisent des outils de gestion et de traduction pour le matériel à localiser à l’aide de logiciels de localisation, de logiciels de terminologie et de mémoires de traduction. Ils évaluent et apprennent à réviser les sorties d'un système de traduction automatique, tout en mettant l'accent sur le contrôle de la qualité.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 552 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 655 Gestion de projets (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 555.
Ce cours traite de la gestion des projets de traduction/localisation multilingues, depuis la création de l’offre de services, jusqu’au contrôle de la qualité et de la livraison, en passant par la résolution de problèmes et la gestion en situation de crise. Il comprend une partie théorique et des mises en situation. Les étudiantes et étudiants se familiarisent avec l’évaluation des ressources (humaines et matérielles) nécessaires pour exécuter le travail, l’élaboration d’échéanciers et le suivi du budget. Ils apprennent à gérer les ressources affectées aux projets afin de pouvoir respecter le mandat qui leur est confié.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 555 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 658 Pratique de la localisation (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 558.
L’étudiante et l’étudiant apprennent dans ce cours les stratégies de localisation et les processus de localisation; la localisation de logiciels et de localisation de sites Web; les acteurs dans les projets de localisation; la situation et le travail du traducteur dans les projets de localisation; les types de fichiers à localiser : ressources, code source, fichiers d’aide, guides imprimés, matériel marketing; les types de logiciels localisés : logiciels système, logiciels de gestion, logiciels client, logiciels multimédia, logiciels Web.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 558 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 668 Web, technologies, traduction : théories et critiques (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 568.
Ce séminaire examine de façon critique les pratiques contemporaines issues de la mondialisation et du monde numérique affectant les technologies, le Web multilingue et la traduction. Entre autres aspects, sont examinés les enjeux culturels, sociaux, techniques et idéologiques. Le séminaire met l'accent sur la traduction et la communication mondiale.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 568 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 680 Tutorat en littérature (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 681 Tutorial in literature (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 682 Tutorat en traduction (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 683 Tutorial in translation (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 684 Tutorat en linguistique (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 685 Tutorial in linguistics (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 698 Étude d’un sujet particulier / Special Topics (3 crédits)
Ce cours pourra porter sur tout sujet en littérature, traduction ou linguistique qui ne figure pas déjà au programme. Le but du cours est de favoriser une approche pluridisciplinaire et de permettre l’innovation pédagogique.
Autres exigences
FTRA 686 Projet de mémoire (6 crédits)
FTRA 692 Mémoire (24 crédits)
L’étudiante ou l’étudiant pourra choisir d’étudier un sujet particulier en littérature, traduction ou linguistique, sous la forme d’un tutorat. Les tutorats devront être approuvés par le comité d’études supérieures et dépendront des aptitudes et intérêts de l’étudiante et de l’étudiant ainsi que de la disponibilité et des compétences du professeur concerné.
Nota : Les étudiantes et étudiants admis avant 2002-2003 et qui ont préféré rester dans l’ancien programme peuvent suivre FTRA 690 (21 crédits) à condition d’avoir satisfait aux exigences de l’ancien programme.
FTRA 501 Traduction littéraire du français à l’anglais (3 crédits)
ou
FTRA 504 Traduction littéraire de l’anglais au français (3 crédits)
FTRA 532 Initiation à la traduction générale (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 533 Aspects théoriques et pratiques de la terminologie (3 crédits)
FTRA 536 Informatique et traduction (3 crédits)
FTRA 500 Méthodologie générale de la recherche en traduction (3 crédits)
ou
FTRA 539 Courants contemporains en traductologie (3 crédits)
ou
FTRA 540 Lecture critique de traductions (3 crédits)
ou
FTRA 549 Sociologie de la traduction littéraire (3 crédits)
FTRA 529 Révision et correction en traduction (A) (3 crédits)
ou
FTRA 530 Révision et correction en traduction (F) (3 crédits)
Cours en option (15 crédits)
15 crédits choisis parmi les cours suivants :
FRAA 523 Rédaction II (3 crédits)
FTRA 513 Traduction scientifique et technique du français à l’anglais (3 crédits)
FTRA 514 Traduction scientifique et technique de l’anglais au français (3 crédits)
FTRA 515 Traduction commerciale et juridique du français à l’anglais (3 crédits)
FTRA 516 Traduction commerciale et juridique de l’anglais au français(3 crédits)
FTRA 517 Stage de formation du français à l’anglais I (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 519 Stage de formation du français à l’anglais II (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 520 Stage de formation (F) (6 crédits)
FTRA 521 Stage de formation (A) (6 crédits)
FTRA 522 Stage de formation de l’anglais au français I (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 526 Stage de formation de l’anglais au français II (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 527 Travaux dirigés (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 528 Travaux dirigés (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 534 Terminologie et mondialisation (3 crédits)
FTRA 538 Initiation au sous-titrage (3 crédits)
FTRA 542 Traduction avancée en sciences humaines et sociales (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 543 Advanced Translation in Social Sciences and the Humanities (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 544 Traduction littéraire avancée (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 545 Advanced Literary Translation (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 547 Traduction économique du français à l’anglais(A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 548 Traduction économique de l’anglais au français (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 552 Traduction assistée par ordinateur (TAO) et post édition (3 crédits)
FTRA 553 Contextes socio-politiques de la traduction (3 crédits)
FTRA 555 Gestion de projets (3 crédits)
FTRA 558 Pratique de la localisation (3 crédits)
FRAA 598 Étude avancée d’un sujet particulier (3 crédits)
FTRA 598 Étude avancée d’un sujet particulier (3 crédits)
Liste des cours
FRAA 523 Rédaction II (3 crédits)
Ce cours vise l’approfondissement des compétences rédactionnelles par l’apprentissage de techniques de recherche documentaire et de synthese textuelle, et par l’écriture de textes combinant ces techniques comme le compte rendu critique, le dossier ou le texte de vulgarisation.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FRAN 503 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 500 Méthodologie générale de la recherche en traduction (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 600.
Ce séminaire examine les principales méthodes et approches appliquées à l’étude de la traduction. Il trace l’émergence de la discipline autonome de la traductologie ainsi que ses liens actuels avec d’autres sciences humaines et sociales. À l’issue du séminaire, l’étudiante ou l’étudiant a une vue d’ensemble de la théorisation en traduction, ce qui lui permet de se spécialiser en connaissance de cause dans un domaine spécifique, en élaborant une problématique particulière cohérente avec les visées du programme et en empruntant les outils de recherche pertinents.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 600 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 501 Traduction littéraire du français à l’anglais (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 635.
Sensibilisation aux problèmes spécifiques à la traduction littéraire. Travaux pratiques : traduction de textes de genres variés (A).
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 635 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 504 Traduction littéraire de l’anglais au français (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 634.
Sensibilisation aux problèmes spécifiques à la traduction littéraire. Travaux pratiques : traduction de textes de genres variés (F).
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 634 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 513 Traduction scientifique et technique du français à l’anglais (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 623.
Initiation aux différents problèmes de la traduction dans les langues de spécialité scientifiques et techniques (français-anglais). Le cours est divisé en deux ou trois parties, chaque partie correspondant à un domaine spécialisé en traduction (A).
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 623 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 514 Traduction scientifique et technique de l’anglais au français (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 624.
Initiation aux différents problèmes de la traduction dans les langues de spécialité scientifiques et techniques (anglais-français). Le cours est divisé en deux ou trois parties, chaque partie correspondant à un domaine spécialisé en traduction (F).
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 624 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 515 Traduction commerciale et juridique du français à l’anglais (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 625.
Initiation aux différents problèmes de la traduction dans les langues de spécialité de l’administration, du commerce et du droit (français-anglais). Le cours est divisé en parties, chaque partie correspondant à un domaine spécialisé en traduction (A).
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 625 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 516 Traduction commerciale et juridique de l’anglais au français (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 626.
Initiation aux différents problèmes de la traduction dans les langues de spécialité de l’administration, du commerce et du droit (anglais-français). Le cours est divisé en parties, chaque partie correspondant à un domaine spécialisé (F).
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 626 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 517 Stage de formation du français à l’anglais I (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 519 Stage de formation du français à l’anglais II (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 520 Stage de formation (F) (6 crédits)
FTRA 521 Stage de formation (A) (6 crédits)
FTRA 522 Stage de formation de l’anglais au français I (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 526 Stage de formation de l’anglais au français II (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 527 Travaux dirigés (A) (3 crédits)
FTRA 528 Travaux dirigés (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 529 Révision et correction en traduction (A) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 629.
Ce cours aborde les différentes méthodes de révision et de correction de textes rédigés ou traduits en anglais; il sensibilise les étudiantes et étudiants aux aspects humains et techniques du métier de réviseure et de réviseur; on touche aussi aux problèmes de l’évaluation de la qualité des traductions (A).
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 629 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 530 Révision et correction en traduction (F) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 630.
Ce cours aborde les différentes méthodes de révision et de correction de textes rédigés ou traduits en français; il sensibilise les étudiantes et étudiants aux aspects humains et techniques du métier de réviseure et de réviseur; on touche aussi aux problèmes de l’évaluation de la qualité des traductions (F).
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 630 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 531 Initiation à la traduction générale (A) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 631.
Ce cours vise à initier les étudiantes et étudiants aux outils notionnels et linguistiques nécessaires pour traduire efficacement des textes d’ordre général. Il leur présente aussi les étapes du processus de la traduction et les familiarise avec les outils de travail de la traduction.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 631 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 532 Initiation à la traduction générale (F) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 632.
Ce cours vise à initier les étudiantes et étudiants aux outils notionnels et linguistiques nécessaires pour traduire efficacement des textes d’ordre général. Il leur présente aussi les étapes du processus de la traduction et les familiarise avec les outils de travail de la traduction.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 632 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 533 Aspects théoriques et pratiques de la terminologie (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 633.
Principes généraux de la terminologie; distinction entre langue générale et langues de spécialité; rapport entre documentation et terminologie; analyse terminologique; terminologie de traduction; supports terminographiques traditionnels et/ou informatisés; terminologie et aménagement linguistique.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 633 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 534 Terminologie et mondialisation (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 611.
Préalable : FTRA 533 ou l’équivalent.
Ce cours porte sur certains points fins en terminologie et en terminographie modernes : synonymie, marques sociolinguistiques, néonymie, normalisation et internationalisation. Il traite spécifiquement du rôle de la terminologie dans la gestion de l’information unilingue et multilingue dans les entreprises et dans les organismes nationaux et internationaux. L’aspect pratique prend, entre autres, la forme de rédaction de rapports de recherche et l’utilisation d’outils terminotiques.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 611 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 536 Informatique et traduction (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 636.
Ce cours porte sur la langue de l’informatique, la théorie et les concepts fondamentaux qui s’y rapportent. Il comporte des exercices de traduction et une initiation aux outils informatisés pour les traducteurs : Internet, bases de données, systèmes de traduction assistée, utilitaires. (F/A)
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 636 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 538 Initiation au sous-titrage (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 638.
Ce cours a pour but d’initier les étudiantes et étudiants à la traduction audiovisuelle, en particulier au sous-titrage. Il comporte un volet théorique, avec lectures et analyses, ainsi qu’un volet pratique où sont traités les principes et les conventions du sous-titrage, les aspects techniques et les genres cinématographiques. Sont aussi abordées la traduction de la voix hors-champ et les techniques d’accessibilité tels le sous-titrage pour malentendants et l’audiodescription.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 638 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 539 Courants contemporains en traductologie (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 601.
Ce séminaire aborde les tendances qui marquent l’actualité de la recherche en traductologie. Sont explorées les nouvelles pratiques de la traduction et l’évolution des cadres conceptuels qui permettent de penser le transfert linguistique et culturel.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 601 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 540 Lecture critique de traductions (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 610.
Ce séminaire propose une étude critique des traductions de l’anglais au français et du français à l’anglais effectuées à travers l’histoire, en tenant compte de la diversité des visées esthétiques, des différentes stratégies de traduction, ainsi que des contraintes socio-politiques ou institutionnelles. L’accent est mis sur l’étude des « grandes traductions » dans les cultures d’expression anglaise et française.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 610 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 542 Traduction avancée en sciences humaines et sociales (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 543 Advanced Translation in Social Sciences and the Humanities (A) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 612 ou FTRA 613.
Ce séminaire pratique et théorique aborde plusieurs domaines des sciences humaines et sociales, notamment la sociologie, la psychanalyse, la théorie féministe. L’étudiante ou l’étudiant produit un commentaire analytique sur ses choix de traduction en s’efforçant de théoriser sa pratique de traducteur-traductrice. Le séminaire FTRA 542 a l’anglais comme langue de départ et le français comme langue d’arrivée (F); le séminaire FTRA 543 a le français comme langue de départ et l’anglais comme langue d’arrivée (A).
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 612 ou FTRA 613 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 544 Traduction littéraire avancée (F) (3 crédits)
FTRA 545 Advanced Literary Translation (A) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 614 ou FTRA 615.
Ce séminaire pratique et théorique analyse, à partir de théories littéraires, contemporaines, un échantillon de textes à traduire. L’étudiante ou l’étudiant produit un commentaire analytique sur ses choix de traduction en s’efforçant de théoriser sa pratique de traducteur-traductrice. Le séminaire FTRA 544 a l’anglais comme langue de départ et le français comme langue d’arrivée (F); le séminaire FTRA 545 a le français comme langue de départ et l’anglais comme langue d’arrivée. (A)
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 614 ou FTRA 615 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 547 Traduction économique du français à l’anglais (A) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 647.
Sensibilisation aux problèmes que pose dans le domaine de l’économie la traduction du français à l’anglais. (A)
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 647 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 548 Traduction économique de l’anglais au français (F) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 648.
Sensibilisation aux problèmes que pose dans le domaine de l’économie la traduction de l’anglais au français. (F)
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 648 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 549 Sociologie de la traduction littéraire (3 crédits)
Ce séminaire applique la méthode sociologique à la traduction des genres et des discours de la littérature. Peuvent être étudiés des corpus divers (roman, poésie, théâtre, par exemple) traduits de l’anglais en français et du français en anglais. Seront examinées, par exemple, les théories de Pierre Bourdieu, de Niklas Luhmann ou de Bruno Latour. Le séminaire est l’occasion d’une remise en question des notions de source et de cible en traduction.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 541, FTRA 611 ou FTRA 619 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 552 Traduction assistée par ordinateur (TAO) et post édition (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 652.
Préalable : FTRA 536 pour le diplôme en traduction.
Ce cours permet d’analyser les aspects morphologiques, lexicaux, syntaxiques et sémantiques des systèmes de traduction automatisée. L’étudiante et l’étudiant apprennent à appliquer les concepts analysés à un système commercialisé. Ils font des exercices simples de programmation portant sur des problèmes linguistiques; ils utilisent des outils de gestion et de traduction pour le matériel à localiser à l’aide de logiciels de localisation, de logiciels de terminologie et de mémoires de traduction. Ils évaluent et apprennent à réviser les sorties d'un système de traduction automatique, tout en mettant l'accent sur le contrôle de la qualité.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 652 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 553 Contextes socio-politiques de la traduction (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 603.
Ce séminaire examine les situations sociales et politiques qui influent sur le travail pratique des traducteurs et la réception des traductions. Sont étudiés, par exemple, le cas des États bilingues ou multilingues, l'évolution des politiques linguistiques et leurs répercussions sur la traduction, les rapports entre les langues majoritaires et minoritaires, les effets de la migration sur les sociétés de plus en plus hybrides et les marchés nouveaux de la traduction.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 550 ou FTRA 603 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 555 Gestion de projets (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 655.
Ce cours traite de la gestion des projets de traduction/localisation multilingues, depuis la création de l’offre de services, jusqu’au contrôle de la qualité et de la livraison, en passant par la résolution de problèmes et la gestion en situation de crise. Il comprend une partie théorique et des mises en situation. Les étudiantes et étudiants se familiarisent avec l’évaluation des ressources (humaines et matérielles) nécessaires pour exécuter le travail, l’élaboration d’échéanciers et le suivi du budget. Ils apprennent à gérer les ressources affectées aux projets afin de pouvoir respecter le mandat qui leur est confié.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 655 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 558 Pratique de la localisation (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 658.
L’étudiante et l’étudiant apprennent dans ce cours les stratégies de localisation et les processus de localisation; la localisation de logiciels et la localisation de sites Web; les acteurs dans les projets de localisation; la situation et le travail du traducteur dans les projets de localisation; les types de fichiers à localiser : ressources, code source, fichiers d’aide, guides imprimés, matériel marketing; les types de logiciels localisés : logiciels système, logiciels de gestion, logiciels clients, logiciels multimédia, logiciels Web.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 658 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 559 Stage en gestion de projet (6 crédits)
FTRA 560 Stage en gestion de projet I (3 crédits)
FTRA 561 Stage en gestion de projet II (3 crédits)
FRAA 598 Étude avancée d’un sujet particulier (3 crédits)
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi un sujet particulier en FRAN 598 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour le même sujet en FRAA 598.
FTRA 598 Étude avancée d’un sujet particulier (3 crédits)
FRAA 500 Didactique du français langue étrangère et seconde (3 crédits)
Ce séminaire vise à présenter les principaux courants en didactique du français langue étrangère et seconde et leurs fondements théoriques. En se basant sur les théories de l’apprentissage, les étudiants analysent en profondeur chacun des principaux courants didactiques en apprenant à discerner ce qui les différencie, les rapproche ou les oppose. Ce séminaire leur offre les outils nécessaires pour faire un choix didactique éclairé en fonction de l'apprentissage visé. Ils y ont l’occasion d’animer un atelier de conversation auprès d’apprenants allophones pour pouvoir faire des liens entre leurs nouveaux acquis et la réalité de l’enseignement-apprentissage, et ce, sous la supervision d’un professeur.
FRAA 501 Théories linguistiques pour l'apprentissage et l’enseignement des langues (3 crédits)
Ce séminaire amène les étudiants à faire le lien entre les théories linguistiques et les applications à l’enseignement et à l’apprentissage du français langue seconde. Il permet aux étudiants de jeter un regard critique sur les principaux courants en linguistique appliquée à l’enseignement des langues et de se sensibiliser à des questions fondamentales qui se posent du point de vue de l’enseignant et de l’apprenant respectivement.
FRAA 502 Technologies de l'information et de la communication (TIC) et enseignement du FLS (3 crédits)
Ce séminaire vise à transmettre aux étudiants l'ensemble des compétences nécessaires à la réalisation de ressources interactives tirant pleinement profit des potentialités offertes par les TIC (apprentissage collaboratif, multimédia, parcours d'apprentissage personnalisés, etc.). Au moyen de la conception de matériel pédagogique en ligne (exerciciels, plateformes de formation ouverte et à distance), les étudiants voient comment optimiser l'apport des TIC à l'acquisition de la langue cible ou à l'évaluation des acquis; intégrer les fondements théoriques et pratiques acquis dans les autres séminaires et répondre pleinement aux besoins des apprenants (que ces besoins soient formatifs ou sommatifs) tout en évitant les écueils didactiques ou techniques que la réalisation de ce type de ressources peut comporter.
FRAA 510 Stage d'observation (3 crédits)
Ce cours permet aux étudiants de réaliser leur stage d'observation en enseignement du français langue seconde dans le cadre d'un cours universitaire. Au cours de ce stage, les étudiants analysent les moyens pédagogiques utilisés au niveau universitaire. Les stagiaires observent les activités d'enseignement, l'organisation et la prise en charge de la classe et ils font un retour critique sur leur expérience pratique à partir des observations faites dans le milieu de stage.
FRAA 522 Questions actuelles en linguistique française (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FRAA 422
Ce cours propose l’étude d’un sujet particulier du domaine de la linguistique. Plus précisément, ce cours aborde des questions qui peuvent être rattachées au domaine de l’énonciation, de la sociolinguistique, des politiques linguistiques, du traitement automatique du langage ou d’autres domaines de recherche en linguistique. Des présentations théoriques, des ateliers d’observation ou des exercices d’application permettent aux étudiants de mieux cerner la problématique abordée.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FRAA 422 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 536 Informatique et traduction (3 crédits)
FTRA 552 Traduction assistée par ordinateur (TAO) et post édition (3 crédits)
FTRA 558 Pratique de la localisation (3 crédits)
FTRA 568 Web, technologies, traduction : théories et critiques
Cours en option (3 crédits)
FRAA 532 Écriture pour le web (3 crédits)
FTRA 538 Initiation au sous-titrage (offert aux deux ans) (3 crédits)
FTRA 555 Gestion de projets (3 crédits)
FTRA 556 Programmation en localisation (offert aux deux ans) (3 crédits)
FTRA 598 Étude avancée d’un sujet particulier / Special Topics (3 crédits)
Liste des cours
FRAA 532 Écriture pour le Web (3 crédits)
Préalable : Autorisation de la direction du certificat.
Ce cours vise à familiariser l’étudiante ou l’étudiant aux techniques d’écriture pour le Web et aux technologies associées à ce média. Il permettra de mieux comprendre ce que l’hypertexte et l’écrit sur support numérique impliquent du point de vue du traitement de l’information et des spécificités linguistiques et ergonomiques. Il vise à initier l’étudiante et l’étudiant à la création et à la traduction de pages et de sites Web.
FTRA 531 Initiation à la traduction générale (A) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 631.
Ce cours vise à initier les étudiantes et étudiants aux outils notionnels et linguistiques nécessaires pour traduire efficacement des textes d’ordre général. Il leur présente aussi les étapes du processus de la traduction et les familiarise avec les outils de travail de la traduction.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 631 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 532 Initiation à la traduction générale (F) (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 632.
Ce cours vise à initier les étudiantes et étudiants aux outils notionnels et linguistiques nécessaires pour traduire efficacement des textes d’ordre général. Il leur présente aussi les étapes du processus de la traduction et les familiarise avec les outils de travail de la traduction.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 632 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 536 Informatique et traduction (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 636.
Ce cours porte sur la langue de l’informatique, la théorie et les concepts fondamentaux qui s’y rapportent. Il comporte des exercices de traduction et une initiation aux outils informatisés pour les traducteurs : Internet, bases de données, systèmes de traduction assistée, utilitaires. (F/A)
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 636 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 538 Initiation au sous-titrage (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 638.
Ce cours a pour but d’initier les étudiantes et étudiants à la traduction audiovisuelle, en
particulier au sous-titrage. Il comporte un volet théorique, avec lectures et analyses, ainsi
qu’un volet pratique où sont traités les principes et les conventions du sous-titrage, les
aspects techniques et les genres cinématographiques. Sont aussi abordées la traduction
de la voix hors-champ et les techniques d’accessibilité tels le sous-titrage pour
malentendants et l’audiodescription.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 638 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 552 Traduction assistée par ordinateur (TAO) et post édition (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 652.
Préalable : FTRA 536 pour le diplôme en traduction.
Ce cours permet d’analyser les aspects morphologiques, lexicaux, syntaxiques et sémantiques des systèmes de traduction automatisée. L’étudiante et l’étudiant apprennent à appliquer les concepts analysés à un système commercialisé. Ils font des exercices simples de programmation portant sur des problèmes linguistiques; ils utilisent des outils de gestion et de traduction pour le matériel à localiser à l’aide de logiciels de localisation, de logiciels de terminologie et de mémoires de traduction. Ils évaluent et apprennent à réviser les sorties d'un système de traduction automatique, tout en mettant l'accent sur le contrôle de la qualité.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 652 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 555 Gestion de projets (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 655.
Ce cours traite de la gestion des projets de traduction/localisation multilingues, depuis la création de l’offre de services, jusqu’au contrôle de la qualité et de la livraison, en passant par la résolution de problèmes et la gestion en situation de crise. Il comprend une partie théorique et des mises en situation. Les étudiantes et étudiants se familiarisent avec l’évaluation des ressources (humaines et matérielles) nécessaires pour exécuter le travail, l’élaboration d’échéanciers et le suivi du budget. Ils apprennent à gérer les ressources affectées aux projets afin de pouvoir respecter le mandat qui leur est confié.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 655 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 556 Programmation en localisation (3 crédits)
Préalable : FTRA 552 ou FTRA 558.
L’étudiante et l’étudiant se familiarisent dans ce cours avec l’environnement informatique : ils se familiarisent avec l’intégration et le partage des ressources d’un (et avec un) logiciel (d’une page Internet) et avec les restrictions liées au système d’exploitation; ils ont un aperçu du fonctionnement d’un logiciel (rédaction, compilation, exécution), d’un programme informatique : variables, données, contrôle; d’un langage de programmation : structure, manipulation des chaînes d’entrée et de sortie, du code « source » d’un programme informatique (ou site Internet) à localiser, des chaînes (des messages) à traduire.
FTRA 558 Pratique de la localisation (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 658.
L’étudiante et l’étudiant apprennent dans ce cours les stratégies de localisation et les processus de localisation : la localisation de logiciels et la localisation de sites Web; les acteurs dans les projets de localisation; la situation et le travail du traducteur dans les projets de localisation; les types de fichiers à localiser : ressources, code source, fichiers d’aide, guides imprimés, matériel marketing; les types de logiciels localisés : logiciels système, logiciels de gestion, logiciels clients, logiciels multimédia, logiciels Web.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 658 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 568 Web, technologies, traduction : théories et critiques (3 crédits)
Co-listé : FTRA 668.
Ce séminaire examine de façon critique les pratiques contemporaines issues de la mondialisation et du monde numérique affectant les technologies, le Web multilingue et la traduction. Entre autres aspects, sont examinés les enjeux culturels, sociaux, techniques et idéologiques. Le séminaire met l'accent sur la traduction et la communication mondiale.
N.B. : Les étudiantes et étudiants qui ont suivi FTRA 668 ne peuvent obtenir de crédits pour ce cours.
FTRA 598 Étude avancée d’un sujet particulier / Special Topics (3 crédits)
HENV 801 Pedagogical Training (3 credits)
The objective of this course is to ensure that all PhD students acquire strong teaching and other communication skills which are useful for both academic and non-academic positions. Candidates are required to attend a seminar in university teaching in collaboration with the Centre for Teaching and Learning Services of Concordia University. Following the successful completion of this seminar, candidates are required to give four lectures (normally 75 minutes each) to undergraduate classes. The course is graded on a pass/fail basis.
HENV 802 Experiential Learning (3 credits)
The objective of this course is to ensure that all students acquire some practical experience in their field of research. Candidates are required to work for a minimum of 200 hours (either full-time or part-time) in either the private sector in a field relevant to their doctoral research, in a research laboratory based outside Concordia University, in a non-profit organization or in the government. The course is graded on a pass/fail basis.
HENV 805 Research Proposal Seminar (3 credits)
Conceptual and methodological frameworks related to human interventions in the environment in the built, social and natural environment are examined through various student presentations and exchanges on their research topic. This course includes completion of the oral presentation of the research proposal.
HENV 810 Thesis Proposal (3 credits)
Students are required to select their research topic and formulate a thesis proposal under the supervision of a thesis supervisor and with input from a supervisory committee. The written proposal includes a sound rationale for the proposed research, a detailed description of the research design and methodology, and a comprehensive literature review. The thesis proposal is assessed by the supervisory committee and approved by the Graduate Program Director.
HENV 885 Comprehensive Exam (6 credits)
The comprehensive exam is prepared in consultation with the supervisory committee and aims to ensure that the student has a sound knowledge of three areas of concentration within his or her field of research. The examining committee consists of the supervisory committee plus one additional member of the Department of Geography, Planning and Environment and is chaired by the Graduate Program Director. The student is evaluated on the quality of the written and oral responses to questions.
HENV 895 Research and Thesis (66 credits)
A major portion of the doctoral program involves the planning and execution of innovative and original research under the direction of a supervisor or two co-supervisors. The thesis is examined by a Thesis Examining Committee and is defended orally.
Elective Courses
HENV 605 Advanced Qualitative Research Methods (3 credits)
This course considers some of the foundational theories that inform contemporary research in the fields of Human Geography and Urban Studies. It also explores a spectrum of qualitative research paradigms, theories and advanced methodologies relevant to social science. of qualitative research paradigms, theories and methodologies relevant to social science.
HENV 610 Advanced Quantitative Research Methods (3 credits)
This course considers experimental design and advanced data analysis methods in Geography and Environmental Sciences. The course focuses on statistical analysis of quantitative data, using the R programming environment. Specific topics include data exploration and plotting,advanced statistical tests, linear regression, statistical model selection, non-parametric tests and mixed effects models.
HENV 620 Sustainable Transportation (3 credits)
This advanced seminar explores the different elements of what is broadly known as sustainable transportation. It considers the importance as well as the negative impacts of transport systems, and how these are described and captured methodologically. Of critical importance is the intimate link between land-use and transportation systems.
HENV 625 Sustainable Resource Management (3 credits)
This seminar examines the impact of human activities on natural resources. Topics such as integrated management and exploitation practices, biodiversity and conservation, focusing particularly on forest and water resources from physical, chemical, biological, socio-economic, and technological perspectives are investigated.
HENV 630 Theories of Society and Space (3 credits)
Human Geography is informed by a range of theories that have developed inside and outside the discipline. This course introduces students to some of the most influential of these theories as well as to theoretically-informed geographical literature. While students are exposed to foundational theories, the course focuses on critical geographical work that seeks to interpret the present moment.
HENV 635 Spatial Analysis (3 credits)
This course examines analytical methods for handling specifically spatial data, where the arrangement of observations in space is thought to be of significance. The emphasis is on the choice and application of appropriate methods for the analysis of various types of data that are encountered in Geography, Planning, and Environmental Studies. Procedures for analyzing spatial distributions of phenomena, temporal dynamics and change are examined in relation to Geographical Information Systems (GIS) tools and statistical techniques.
HENV 640 (Re)shaping the City (3 credits)
By relying on an array of theoretical formulations informed by political economy, economic geography, urban morphology, urban sociology, anthropology and ecology, this seminar explores various social processes that contribute to the shaping and reshaping of our cities’ material and spatial forms.
HENV 645 Behaviour and the Urban Environment (3 credits)
This course provides a basic understanding of the relationship between people and the urban environment. The focus is on the collective and individual responses of people to the built or designed environment, and the way in which these responses can be used to guide projects, plans and policies. The basic studies for the location of commercial facilities and the modelling of human spatial behaviour are introduced.
HENV 650 The Political-Economy of the City (3 credits)
This course explores the implications of economic globalization and neoliberalism for urban life in late capitalist (post-1970s) period. Drawing on literatures from the fields of planning, geography, and political economy, it focuses on how urban policies and services are being restructured and how these changes affect different social groups.
HENV 655 Environmental Modelling (3 credits)
The different approaches to modelling the bio-physical, built or human environment are examined. The conceptualization of simple models to examine how human interventions affect the environment is investigated. Different modelling approaches such as system models, computer visualization and simulation are covered. Students develop a model scheme related to their thesis topic. Lectures and laboratory.
HENV 660 Climate Change and Sustainability (3 credits)
This seminar examines the interface between climate science, and the demands and challenges of developing sustainable human societies. Class discussions are oriented around current literature on topics such as the potential impacts of climate change on vulnerable communities, strategies to enhance resilience and increase global equity in climate mitigation efforts, and opportunities to develop sustainable energy systems. The course also includes quantitative analysis and visualization of spatial change datasets.
HENV 665 Special Topics Seminar (3 credits)
This course is designed to meet the special needs of individual graduate students. Topics vary to permit investigation of current and developing theories and research areas. Content involves presentation, discussion, and critical analysis of information from relevant scientific literature. The course will also take advantage of visiting expertise.
HENV 670 Environmental Governance (3 credits)
This course examines the principles, practices and institutions involved in environmental conservation and management as well as the sustainable exploitation of natural resources. Topics include sustainability, the precautionary principle, social capital, adaptive capacity, common property resource theories, deliberative democracy, environmental justice and environmental conflict resolution. Attention is given to issues of scale, particularly the mismatch of spatial, temporal and functional scales that characterize unsustainable management and use practices.
HENV 675 Community-Based Conservation (3 credits)
This course addresses the question of community participation in conservation and development initiatives. Focusing on the particular experience of local communities, it presents participatory concepts, principles, tools, and processes that have practical application to a broad range of contexts and settings.
Note: Students who have received credit for GEOG 607 may not take this course for credit.
HENV 680 Advanced Seminar in Environmental Science (3 credits)
This course provides an overview of current research in environmental and related scientific disciplines. The course involves seminars, presentations, and critical analysis of scientific literature, including discussion of cutting-edge research topics in fields such as ecological restoration, biodiversity, climate change, renewable energy, food and water security, and natural resource conservation.
HENV 690 Seminar in Social and Cultural Geography (3 credits)
This seminar introduces students to some important contemporary geographical approaches and topics in the study of society and culture. Specific themes may include globalization, migration, multiculturalism and diaspora, marginality, policing and imprisonment, and social movements. To provide a broad understanding of these themes, the course emphasizes analyses that draw upon geographical concepts of space, place, identity, and power.
ENVS 601 EA: Concepts, Principles and Practice (6 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
This course aims to provide students with theoretical and practical knowledge related to environmental assessment and its role in project planning and policy development. The evolution of environmental assessment (EA), its current practices and functions, and future directions arediscussed. The roles and components of EA and EA procedures in Canada (at both the federal and provincial levels) are emphasized. Guest speakers, regular readings and in-class discussions supplement the lectures.
ENVS 608 Getting Ready for the EA Internship (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
Students gain an understanding of the internship process and acquire information necessary to prepare for the work involved in securing an internship. Workshops on professional development help students prepare for and secure internship placements, and enhance their report writing and oral presentation skills. The course includes four workshops: 1) Internship requirement and timeline, 2) Resumé writing and interview techniques, 3) Writing of final report and preparation for oral presentation, and 4) Basic concepts of project management. Students are required to assess the written internship reports and oral presentations of their peers. The course is graded on a pass/fail basis.
ENVS 652 Data Collection and Analysis for EA (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
This course focuses on methods and issues in data collection and analysis appropriate for impact prediction in the abiotic, biotic and built environment, including air, surface and ground water, soil, landscape, biodiversity, noise, cultural and socio-economic conditions.
Note: Students who have received credit for ENVS 662 may not take this course for credit.
ENVS 653 Geographical Information Systems for EA (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
This course examines the use of Geographical Information Systems (GIS) in Environmental  Assessment (EA), particularly focusing on the role of GIS in the analysis of environmental data and in decision-making processes. Topics covered include data acquisition, multi-criteria decision analysis, fuzzy sets and interpolation techniques. The course comprises lectures, lab exercises and case study analysis. The instruction is built around a series of practical exercises mainly using industry-standard GIS software. The objective of the course is to provide a sound theoretical and practical background in the use of geospatial technologies for EA applications.
Note: Students who have received credit for ENVS 663 may not take this course for credit.
ENVS 664 Field Course in EA (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
The goal of this course is to expose students to practical issues related to Environmental Assessment (EA). The course comprises: (1) in-class preparation meetings followed by (2) a one-week in-field experience. During this week, students meet practitioners and individuals from local communities, industries and/or governments involved in EA. Through these interactions, students are exposed to a diverse range of perspectives and experiences related to EA. The course is validated through an assessment of the knowledge acquired during the trip. Students are responsible for the cost of food, accommodation and transportation associated with the one-week field trip (cost varies depending on destination).
Note: Students who have received credit for ENVS 662 may not take this course for credit.
ENVS 668 Indigenous Peoples and Environmental Assessment (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
Development projects are often located on or adjacent to Indigenous territories with significant impacts on their lands, lives and cultures. As such, Indigenous peoples require unique consideration within EA frameworks which should respect Indigenous and treaty rights, including international commitments (e.g. UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples) and court rulings related to: (1) Free, Prior, and Informed Consent (FPIC) for development proposed on Indigenous lands; and (2) the inclusion of Indigenous knowledge and perspectives in decision-making. This seminar course surveys recent developments in these areas and explores the potential of EA to contribute to reconciliation between Indigenous and non-Indigenous peoples in Canada (and elsewhere).
Elective Courses
BIOL 618 Ecology for Environmentalists (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
This course discusses the principles of the ecology of individuals, populations, communities and ecosystems and the effects of environmental disturbances ranging from immediate pollution to long-term climate change.
Note 1: Students who have received credit for BIOL 508 may not take this course for credit.
Note 2: Students registered in a graduate program in Biology may not take this course for credit.
ECON 659 Economics for Environmentalists (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
This course considers one of the most serious problems facing our global civilization: the on-going conflict between economic activity and the bio-physical world upon which all human activity ultimately depends. The course explains the basic theoretical framework most economists use to describe economic activities and the relationship between these activities and the natural world. Understanding the logical apparatus of economics theory shows why market forces and environmental integrity are often in conflict and why economic arguments dominate environmental policy debates at both national and international levels.
Note 1: Students who have received credit for ECON 559 may not take this course for credit.
Note 2: Students registered in programs in Economics, or programs in the John Molson School of Business, may not take this course for credit.
ENVS 604 Environmental Law and Policy (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Programme Director.
This course introduces students to environmental law and policy at the international, North American and regional levels with an emphasis on Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) as a tool for promoting environmentally sound and sustainable development. The course provides an overview of issues such as environmental security, Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA), banking and environmental finance, access to justice in environmental decision making, climate change, biodiversity, and green growth. The role of international organizations and Multilateral Environmental Agreements (MEAs) is given particular attention.
ENVS 605 Environmental Standards (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
This course provides an overview of the International Standards Organization (ISO) standards and guidelines for industry to implement a sound Environmental Management System (EMS). These guidelines are outlined in a series of publications designated as ISO 14000. Topics covered will include: the evolution and benefits of EMS, the ISO 14001 principles, integration between ISO 9001 and 14001, the registration process, auditing an EMS, life cycle assessment, and environmental labelling. Upon successful completion of the course, students are encouraged to pursue formal accreditation.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under an ENVS 505 number may not take this course for credit.
ENVS 620 Advanced Topics in Environmental Assessment (3 credits)
This course focuses on selected topics within the discipline. Topics vary to permit investigation of current and developing theories and research areas.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. ENVS 620A, ENVS 620B, etc.
GEOG 607 Indigenous Peoples and the Environment (3 credits)
This course provides an extended, in-depth exploration of the relationships and roles of Indigenous peoples with respect to their traditional territories and natural resources. Indigenous ontologies and epistemologies are highlighted in addition to Indigenous aspirations and approaches for use and stewardship of the environment. The course examines theoretical and case-study literature, with a broad regional focus on Aboriginal peoples in Canada while also drawing from comparative international experiences of Indigenous peoples.
GEOG 620 Special Topics in Geography (3 credits)
This course focuses on selected topics within the discipline. Topics vary to permit investigation of current and developing theories and research areas.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. GEOG 620A, GEOG 620B, etc.
HENV 610 Advanced Quantitative Research Methods (3 credits)
This course considers experimental design and advanced data analysis methods in Geography and Environmental Sciences. The course focuses on statistical analysis of quantitative data, using the R programming environment. Specific topics include data exploration and plotting, advanced statistical tests, linear regression, statistical model selection, non-parametric tests and mixed effects models.
HENV 625 Sustainable Resource Management (3 credits)
This seminar examines the impact of human activities on natural resources. Topics such as integrated management and exploitation practices, biodiversity and conservation, focusing particularly on forest and water resources from physical, chemical, biological, socio-economic, and technological perspectives are investigated.
HENV 660 Climate Change and Sustainability (3 credits)
This seminar examines the interface between climate science, and the demands and challenges of developing sustainable human societies. Class discussions are oriented around current literature on topics such as the potential impacts of climate change on vulnerable communities, strategies to enhance resilience and increase global equity in climate mitigation efforts, and opportunities to develop sustainable energy systems. The course also includes quantitative analysis and visualization of spatial change datasets.
HENV 655 Environmental Modelling (3 credits)
The different approaches to modelling the bio-physical, built or human environment are examined. The conceptualization of simple models to examine how human interventions affect the environment is investigated. Different modelling approaches such as system models, computer visualization and simulation are covered. Students develop a model scheme related to their thesis topic. Lectures and laboratory.
HENV 670 Environmental Governance (3 credits)
This course examines the principles, practices and institutions involved in environmental conservation and management as well as the sustainable exploitation of natural resources. Topics include sustainability, the precautionary principle, social capital, adaptive capacity, common property resource theories, deliberative democracy, environmental justice and environmental conflict resolution. Attention is given to issues of scale, particularly the mismatch of spatial, temporal and functional scales that characterize unsustainable management and use practices.
HENV 675 Community-Based Conservation (3 credits)
This course addresses the question of community participation in conservation and development initiatives. Focusing on the particular experience of local communities, it presents participatory concepts, principles, tools, and processes that have practical application to a broad range of contexts and settings.
Note: Students who have received credit for GEOG 607 may not take this course for credit.
HENV 680 Advanced Seminar in Environmental Science (3 credits)
This course provides an overview of current research in environmental and related scientific disciplines. The course involves seminars, presentations, and critical analysis of scientific literature, including discussion of cutting-edge research topics in fields such as ecological restoration, biodiversity, climate change, renewable energy, food and water security, and natural resource conservation.
Internship and Report
ENVS 696 Internship and Report in EA (18 credits)
Prerequisite: Completion of all course work (27 credits), a minimum GPA of 3.30 and permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
This internship is a 4-month placement in industry, government, and non-government where EA work is being undertaken. It is intended to maximize the educational experience and bridge the gap between what employers consider necessary job skills and what the university considers essential knowledge. Students prepare an internship report and present it orally.
Note: Students are assisted in their efforts to obtain a relevant placement by the Internship Coordinator. Placements must be approved by the EA Graduate Program Director.
HENV 605 Advanced Qualitative Research Methods (3 credits)
This course considers some of the foundational theories that inform contemporary research in the fields of Human Geography and Urban Studies. It also explores a spectrum of qualitative research paradigms, theories and advanced methodologies relevant to social science. of qualitative research paradigms, theories and methodologies relevant to social science.
HENV 610 Advanced Quantitative Research Methods (3 credits)
This course considers experimental design and advanced data analysis methods in Geography and Environmental Sciences. The course focuses on statistical analysis of quantitative data, using the R programming environment. Specific topics include data exploration and plotting, advanced statistical tests, linear regression, statistical model selection, non-parametric tests and mixed effects models.
HENV 615 Research Proposal Seminar (3 credits)
This seminar provides an opportunity to extend, deepen, and apply the conceptual and methodological frameworks presented in the core and elective courses, through a combination of classroom discussions and attendance at departmental research seminars. Students are taught research and presentation skills and are guided through the process of preparing their thesis research proposal. Students need to submit a written research proposal to their thesis research supervisor(s) as a requirement for this course.
HENV 685 Thesis Proposal (3 credits)
Students are required to select their research topic and formulate a research proposal under the supervision of a thesis supervisor and with input from a thesis committee. The written proposal will include a sound rationale for the proposed research, a detailed description of the research design and methodology, and a comprehensive literature review. Students are also required to present an oral presentation of their proposal to the Department. The thesis proposal must be formally approved by the thesis committee and the Graduate Program Director before research activities can begin. The thesis proposal should be completed before the end of the second semester of residency in the Program and after a minimum of 6 credits in the Program have been taken.
HENV 695 Thesis (30 credits)
Students are required to demonstrate their ability to carry out original, independent research. The thesis, which will be researched and written under the direction of a supervisor and thesis committee, should normally not exceed 100 pages. Upon completion of the thesis, the student will be required to defend his/her thesis before an external examiner and his/her thesis committee.
Elective Courses
GEOG 620 Special Topics in Geography (3 credits)
This course focuses on selected topics within the discipline. Topics vary to permit investigation of current and developing theories and research areas.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. GEOG 620A, GEOG 620B, etc.
GEOG 625 Directed Studies (3 credits)
With written permission of the graduate program director, a student studies a particular field or topic relating to geography, urban or environment studies. A detailed outline of the proposed study, approved by a study supervisor is required.
HENV 620 Sustainable Transportation (3 credits)
This advanced seminar explores the different elements of what is broadly known as sustainable transportation. It considers the importance as well as the negative impacts of transport systems, and how these are described and captured methodologically. Of critical importance is the intimate link between land-use and transportation systems.
HENV 625 Sustainable Resource Management (3 credits)
This seminar examines the impact of human activities on natural resources. Topics such as integrated management and exploitation practices, biodiversity and conservation, focusing particularly on forest and water resources from physical, chemical, biological, socio-economic, and technological perspectives are investigated.
HENV 630 Theories of Society and Space (3 credits)
Human Geography is informed by a range of theories that have developed inside and outside the discipline. This course introduces students to some of the most influential of these theories as well as to theoretically-informed geographical literature. While students are exposed to foundational theories, the course focuses on critical geographical work that seeks to interpret the present moment.
HENV 635 Spatial Analysis (3 credits)
This course examines analytical methods for handling specifically spatial data, where the arrangement of observations in space is thought to be of significance. The emphasis is on the choice and application of appropriate methods for the analysis of various types of data that are encountered in Geography, Planning and Environmental Studies. Procedures for analyzing spatial distributions of phenomena, temporal dynamics and change are examined in relation to Geographical Information Systems (GIS) tools and statistical techniques.
HENV 640 (Re)shaping the City (3 credits)
By relying on an array of theoretical formulations informed by political economy, economic geography, urban morphology, urban sociology, anthropology and ecology, this seminar explores various social processes that contribute to the shaping and reshaping of our cities’ material and spatial forms.
HENV 645 Behaviour and the Urban Environment (3 credits)
This course provides a basic understanding of the relationship between people and the urban environment. The focus is on the collective and individual responses of people to the built or designed environment, and the way in which these responses can be used to guide projects, plans and policies. The basic studies for the location of commercial facilities and the modelling of human spatial behaviour are introduced.
HENV 650 The Political Economy of the City (3 credits)
This course explores the implications of economic globalization and neoliberalism for urban life in late capitalist (post-1970s) period. Drawing on literatures from the fields of planning, geography, and political economy, it focuses on how urban policies and services are being restructured and how these changes affect different social groups.
HENV 655 Environmental Modelling (3 credits)
The different approaches to modelling the bio-physical, built or human environment are examined. The conceptualization of simple models to examine how human interventions affect the environment is investigated. Different modelling approaches such as system models, computer visualization and simulation are covered. Students develop a model scheme related to their thesis topic. Lectures and laboratory.
HENV 660 Climate Change and Sustainability (3 credits)
This seminar examines the interface between climate science, and the demands and challenges of developing sustainable human societies. Class discussions are oriented around current literature on topics such as the potential impacts of climate change on vulnerable communities, strategies to enhance resilience and increase global equity in climate mitigation efforts, and opportunities to develop sustainable energy systems. The course also includes quantitative analysis and visualization of spatial change datasets.
HENV 665 Special Topics Seminar (3 credits)
This course is designed to meet the special needs of individual graduate students. Topics vary to permit investigation of current and developing theories and research areas. Content involves presentation, discussion, and critical analysis of information from relevant scientific literature. The course will also take advantage of visiting expertise.
HENV 670 Environmental Governance (3 credits)
This course examines the principles, practices and institutions involved in environmental conservation and management as well as the sustainable exploitation of natural resources. Topics include sustainability, the precautionary principle, social capital, adaptive capacity, common property resource theories, deliberative democracy, environmental justice and environmental conflict resolution. Attention is given to issues of scale, particularly the mismatch of spatial, temporal and functional scales that characterize unsustainable management and use practices.
HENV 675 Community-Based Conservation (3 credits)
This course addresses the question of community participation in conservation and development initiatives. Focusing on the particular experience of local communities, it presents participatory concepts, principles, tools, and processes that have practical application to a broad range of contexts and settings.
Note: Students who have received credit for GEOG 607 may not take this course for credit.
HENV 680 Advanced Seminar in Environmental Science (3 credits)
This course provides an overview of current research in environmental and related scientific disciplines. The course involves seminars, presentations, and critical analysis of scientific literature, including discussion of cutting-edge research topics in fields such as ecological restoration, biodiversity, climate change, renewable energy, food and water security, and natural resource conservation.
HENV 690 Seminar in Social and Cultural Geography (3 credits)
This seminar introduces students to some important contemporary geographical approaches and topics in the study of society and culture. Specific themes may include globalization, migration, multiculturalism and diaspora, marginality, policing and imprisonment, and social movements. To provide a broad understanding of these themes, the course emphasizes analyses that draw upon geographical concepts of space, place, identity, and power.
ENVS 601 EA: Concepts, Principles and Practice (6 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
This course aims to provide students with theoretical and practical knowledge related to environmental assessment and its role in project planning and policy development. The evolution of environmental assessment (EA), its current practices and functions, and future directions arediscussed. The roles and components of EA and EA procedures in Canada (at both the federal and provincial levels) are emphasized. Guest speakers, regular readings and in-class discussions supplement the lectures.
ENVS 652 Data Collection and Analysis for EA (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
This course focuses on methods and issues in data collection and analysis appropriate for impact prediction in the abiotic, biotic and built environment, including air, surface and ground water, soil, landscape, biodiversity, noise, cultural and socio-economic conditions.
Note: Students who have received credit for ENVS 662 many take this course for credit.
ENVS 653 Geographical Information Systems for EA (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
This course examines the use of Geographical Information Systems (GIS) in Environmental  Assessment (EA), particularly focusing on the role of GIS in the analysis of environmental data and in decision-making processes. Topics covered include data acquisition multi-criteria decision analysis, fuzzy sets and interpolation techniques. The course comprises lectures, lab exercises and case study analysis. The instruction is built around a series of practical exercises mainly using industry-standard GIS software. The objective of the course is to provide a sound theoretical and practical background in the use of geospatial technologies for EA applications.
Note: Students who have received credit for ENVS 663 may not take this course for credit.
ENVS 668 Indigenous Peoples and Environmental Assessment (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
Development projects are often located on or adjacent to Indigenous territories with significant impacts on their lands, lives and cultures. As such, Indigenous peoples require unique consideration within EA frameworks which should respect Indigenous and treaty rights, including international commitments (e.g. UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples) and court rulings related to: (1) Free, Prior, and Informed Consent (FPIC) for development proposed on Indigenous lands; and (2) the inclusion of Indigenous knowledge and perspectives in decision-making. This seminar course surveys recent developments in these areas and explores the potential of EA to contribute to reconciliation between Indigenous and non-Indigenous peoples in Canada (and elsewhere).
Elective Courses
BIOL 618 Ecology for Environmentalists (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
This course discusses the principles of the ecology of individuals, populations, communities and ecosystems and the effects of environmental disturbances ranging from immediate pollution to long-term climate change.
Note 1: Students who have received credit for BIOL 508 may not take this course for credit.
Note 2: Students registered in a graduate program in Biology may not take this course for credit.
ECON 659 Economics for Environmentalists (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
This course considers one of the most serious problems facing our global civilization: the on-going conflict between economic activity and the bio-physical world upon which all human activity ultimately depends. The course explains the basic theoretical framework most economists use to describe economic activities and the relationship between these activities and the natural world. Understanding the logical apparatus of economics theory shows why market forces and environmental integrity are often in conflict and why economic arguments dominate environmental policy debates at both national and international levels.
Note 1: Students who have received credit for ECON 559 may not take this course for credit.
Note 2: Students registered in programs in Economics, or programs in the John Molson School of Business, may not take this course for credit.
ENVS 604 Environmental Law and Policy (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Programme Director.
This course introduces students to environmental law and policy at the international, North American and regional levels with an emphasis on Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) as a tool for promoting environmentally sound and sustainable development. The course provides an overview of issues such as environmental security, Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA), banking and environmental finance, access to justice in environmental decision making, climate change, biodiversity, and green growth. The role of international organizations and Multilateral Environmental Agreements (MEAs) is given particular attention.
ENVS 605 Environmental Standards (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
This course provides an overview of the International Standards Organization (ISO) standards and guidelines for industry to implement a sound Environmental Management System (EMS). These guidelines are outlined in a series of publications designated as ISO 14000. Topics covered will include: the evolution and benefits of EMS, the ISO 14001 principles, integration between ISO 9001 and 14001, the registration process, auditing an EMS, life cycle assessment, and environmental labelling. Upon successful completion of the course, students are encouraged to pursue formal accreditation.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under an ENVS 505 number may not take this course for credit.
ENVS 620 Advanced Topics in Environmental Assessment (3 credits)
This course focuses on selected topics within the discipline. Topics vary to permit investigation of current and developing theories and research areas.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. ENVS 620A, ENVS 620B, etc.
ENVS 664 Field Course in EA (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the EA Graduate Program Director.
The goal of this course is to expose students to practical issues related to Environmental Assessment (EA). The course comprises: (1) in-class preparation meetings followed by (2) a one-week in-field experience. During this week, students meet practitioners and individuals from local communities, industries and/or governments involved in EA. Through these interactions, students are exposed to a diverse range of perspectives and experiences related to EA. The course is validated through an assessment of the knowledge acquired during the trip. Students are responsible for the cost of food, accommodation and transportation associated with the one-week field trip (cost varies depending on destination).
Note: Students who have received credit for ENVS 662 may not take this course for credit.
GEOG 607 Indigenous Peoples and the Environment (3 credits)
This course provides an extended, in-depth exploration of the relationships and roles of Indigenous peoples with respect to their traditional territories and natural resources. Indigenous ontologies and epistemologies are highlighted in addition to Indigenous aspirations and approaches for use and stewardship of the environment. The course examines theoretical and case-study literature, with a broad regional focus on Aboriginal peoples in Canada while also drawing from comparative international experiences of Indigenous peoples.
GEOG 620 Special Topics in Geography (3 credits)
This course focuses on selected topics within the discipline. Topics vary to permit investigation of current and developing theories and research areas.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. GEOG 620A, GEOG 620B, etc.
HENV 610 Advanced Quantitative Research Methods (3 credits)
This course considers experimental design and advanced data analysis methods in Geography and Environmental Sciences. The course focuses on statistical analysis of quantitative data, using the R programming environment. Specific topics include data exploration and plotting, advanced statistical tests, linear regression, statistical model selection, non-parametric tests and mixed effects models.
HENV 625 Sustainable Resource Management (3 credits)
This seminar examines the impact of human activities on natural resources. Topics such as integrated management and exploitation practices, biodiversity and conservation, focusing particularly on forest and water resources from physical, chemical, biological, socio-economic, and technological perspectives are investigated.
HENV 660 Climate Change and Sustainability (3 credits)
This seminar examines the interface between climate science, and the demands and challenges of developing sustainable human societies. Class discussions are oriented around current literature on topics such as the potential impacts of climate change on vulnerable communities, strategies to enhance resilience and increase global equity in climate mitigation efforts, and opportunities to develop sustainable energy systems. The course also includes quantitative analysis and visualization of spatial change datasets.
HENV 655 Environmental Modelling (3 credits)
The different approaches to modelling the bio-physical, built or human environment are examined. The conceptualization of simple models to examine how human interventions affect the environment is investigated. Different modelling approaches such as system models, computer visualization and simulation are covered. Students develop a model scheme related to their thesis topic. Lectures and laboratory.
HENV 670 Environmental Governance (3 credits)
This course examines the principles, practices and institutions involved in environmental conservation and management as well as the sustainable exploitation of natural resources. Topics include sustainability, the precautionary principle, social capital, adaptive capacity, common property resource theories, deliberative democracy, environmental justice and environmental conflict resolution. Attention is given to issues of scale, particularly the mismatch of spatial, temporal and functional scales that characterize unsustainable management and use practices.
HENV 675 Community-Based Conservation (3 credits)
This course addresses the question of community participation in conservation and development initiatives. Focusing on the particular experience of local communities, it presents participatory concepts, principles, tools, and processes that have practical application to a broad range of contexts and settings.
Note: Students who have received credit for GEOG 607 may not take this course for credit.
HENV 680 Advanced Seminar in Environmental Science (3 credits)
This course provides an overview of current research in environmental and related scientific disciplines. The course involves seminars, presentations, and critical analysis of scientific literature, including discussion of cutting-edge research topics in fields such as ecological restoration, biodiversity, climate change, renewable energy, food and water security, and natural resource conservation.
HEXS 801 Scientific Communication and Pedagogy in Health and Exercise Science (3 credits), HEXS 820 Special Topics in Health and Exercise Science (3 credits).
6 credits chosen from HEXS 810, 811 or 812 Advanced Topics in Health and Exercise Science.
Comprehensive Exam in Health and Exercise Science. HEXS 850 (6 credits). The examining committee consists of the student’s supervisory committee and is chaired by the Graduate Program Director. The student is evaluated on the basis of the quality of the oral and written presentations and on the responses to the questions from the examining committee.
Research Proposal in Health and Exercise Science. HEXS 851 (3 credits). Students are required to write a research proposal describing a series of projects leading to the production of new knowledge from hypothesis-driven data acquisition and experimental inquiry. A supervisory committee including the supervisor and three additional faculty members (often the same as the comprehensive examination) with varied expertise related to the thesis topic is formed to guide the student with the production of the proposal. The proposal is presented in written form to the committee, and in oral form to the committee and department.
Research and Thesis in Health and Exercise Science. HEXS 890 (69 credits). Students are required to write a PhD research thesis, consisting of the production of new research knowledge from hypothesis-driven data acquisition and experimental inquiry. The research project should involve the integration of knowledge from the health sciences.The thesis is examined by a Thesis Examining Committee and is defended orally.
Academic Regulations
Academic Standing. Please refer to the Academic Standing section of the Calendar for a detailed review of the Academic Regulations.
Program Specific Requirements. Students must obtain an assessment grade point average (AGPA) of 3.00 based on a minimum of 6 credits.
Residence. The minimum residence requirement is two years (six terms) of full-time study beyond the master’s degree, or three years (nine terms) of full-time study beyond the bachelor’s degree.
Time Limit. All work for the doctoral degree must be completed by the end of the fourth calendar year following the year of admission to candidacy, defined as successful completion of the Comprehensive Exam in Health and Exercise Science (HEXS 850) and the Research Proposal in Health and Exercise Science (HEXS 851). Please refer to the Academic Regulation page for further details regarding the Time Limit requirements.
Graduation Requirement. In order to graduate, students must have a cumulative GPA of 3.00.
Courses
HEXS 801 Scientific Communication and Pedagogy in Health and Exercise Science (3 credits)
This course meets the needs of graduate students in developing adequate skills to communicate scientific information efficiently to different interest groups, such as grant adjudication committees, the general public, or undergraduate and graduate students in an academic setting. It serves in developing scientific communication skills by focusing on written and oral presentation skills, aimed at the scientists, students, or lay public. Faculty members from the department and selected guests provide information and applications on successful approaches to reach each of these groups. On the pedagogical side, it includes the development of course objectives and a course outline, along with preparing and presenting a lecture at the undergraduate level. It also involves presentation, discussion, and critical analysis of information from current scientific journal literature for scientists.
HEXS 810 Advanced Topics in Health and Exercise Science: Physiology Module (3 credits)
This course examines the fundamental mechanisms and the functional control of specific systems of the body. A detailed analysis of the system, including the molecular and systemic aspects of the given system is addressed. This course focuses on recent research outcomes and new issues in molecular and systemic physiology. The course content varies depending on the specific system studied.
HEXS 811 Advanced Topics in Health and Exercise Science: Intervention Module (3 credits)
This course examines concepts in the rehabilitation process from exercise adherence to tissue healing, and introduces students to various exercise protocols specific to the selected area of study. Students learn how to implement safe and effective rehabilitation protocols to address dysfunction and functional recovery. This course focuses on recent research outcomes and new issues in rehabilitation specific to prevention, assessment, and rehabilitation of injuries. The course content varies depending on the area of rehabilitation.
HEXS 812 Advanced Topics in Health and Exercise Science: Population Health Module (3 credits)
This course surveys the health-related aspects of exercise, physical activity, and physical fitness from a population health perspective. Topics include current debates in biomedical ethics, health policy, as well as, methods and concepts in behavioural and environmental determinants of activity and fitness.
HEXS 820 Special Topics in Health and Exercise Science (3 credits)
This course provides students with flexibility to address a specific area of specialization in Health and Exercise Science. This can be a reading course organized by the supervisor, a course chosen from the list of Advanced Topics courses, or a similar-level course from another department or institution, while being related to a specialization in Health and Exercise Science. The course is chosen in consultation with the student's supervisory committee. The course can be internal or external, and provides students with the capacity to specialize even further in relation to their research project.
HEXS 850 Comprehensive Exam in Health and Exercise Science (6 credits)
The comprehensive exam is given by an examination committee composed of selected faculty members, at the end of the first year of study. The committee includes the supervisor and three additional faculty members with varied expertise related to the thesis topic. The examination committee identifies selected readings for the student. The student is expected to prepare for both a written and an oral examination. The body of knowledge for the comprehensive examination is defined by the committee in the form of advanced book chapters and other scientific readings. The written exam comes first, composed of five (5) questions asked by the committee, in the form of argumentative essays written in the span of two weeks; following a satisfactory evaluation of this work, the student is convened to the oral part, comprising a series of questions coming from the panel concerning the written answers or additional aspects coming from the readings. The student has to successfully pass the comprehensive examination in order to progress to the proposal, usually the following term. The course is graded on a pass/fail basis.
HEXS 851 Research Proposal in Health and Exercise Science (3 credits)
Prerequisite: HEXS 850.
Students are required to write a research proposal describing a series of projects leading to the production of new knowledge from hypothesis-driven data acquisition and experimental inquiry. A supervisory committee including the supervisor and three additional faculty members (often the same as the comprehensive examination) with varied expertise related to the thesis topic is formed to guide the student with the production of the proposal. The proposal is presented in written form to the committee, and in oral form to the committee and department. The course is graded on a pass/fail basis.
HEXS 890 Research and Thesis in Health and Exercise Science (69 credits)
EXCI 610 – Statistics and Research Design (3 credits)
EXCI 612 – Laboratory Techniques (3 credits)
EXCI 624 – Special Topics Seminar (3 credits)
EXCI 626 – Thesis Proposal (3 credits)
EXCI 670 Thesis (33 credits)
OR
EXCI 680 – Thesis (Athletic Therapy) (33 credits)
OR
EXCI 690 – Thesis (Clinical Exercise Physiology) (33 credits)
Master of/Magisteriate in Science (Health and Exercise Science) (45 credits)
Year I
Fall (6 credits) EXCI 610 (3 credits), 624 (3 credits)
Winter (6 credits) EXCI 612 (3 credits), 626 (3 credits)
Year II
33 credits EXCI 670 (33 credits) or EXCI 680 (33 credits) or EXCI 690 (33 credits)
Course Descriptions
EXCI 610 Statistics and Research Design (3 credits)
This course provides students with a background in statistics and experimental design. Students are exposed to a variety of experimental designs applicable to the exercise sciences. The course covers the application of statistical concepts in consideration of specific experimental design methods. A number of parametric and non-parametric statistics are introduced for hypothesis testing, with the opportunity to apply relevant knowledge using various statistical software packages.
EXCI 612 Laboratory Techniques (3 credits)
The course provides a theoretical awareness of measurement principles and offers practical experience in applying techniques common to advanced research methodologies in exercise science. The potential topics to be covered are geared towards the requirements of the individual in the areas of exercise physiology and athletic therapy. These may include such topics as data acquisition and analysis, electromyography, blood flow methodologies, spectrophotometry, pulmonary gas exchange, motion analysis, and tissue histochemistry.
EXCI 624 Special Topics Seminar (3 credits)
This course is designed to meet the special needs of graduate students in the exercise science areas of concentration specific to athletic therapy and clinical exercise physiology. Topics vary within the domain to account for investigation of current and developing theories. The course involves presentation, discussion, and critical analysis of information from current scientific journal literature.
EXCI 626 Thesis Proposal (3 credits)
This course provides students with the opportunity to choose a research topic and formulate a research proposal under the supervision of a thesis advisor. The proposal should include a literature review, rationale, hypothesis, and methodology including the planned research design and data analysis. Students are required to present a seminar in the Department on their research prior to the presentation of their proposal to the thesis advisory committee.
EXCI 670 Thesis (33 credits)
Prerequisite: EXCI 626.
Students are required to demonstrate their ability to carry out independent research which reflects a scientific approach. In addition to a written final thesis, a public oral examination is conducted to test the student's ability to defend the thesis.
EXCI 680 Thesis (Athletic Therapy) (33 credits)
Prerequisite: EXCI 626.
Students are required to demonstrate their ability to carry out independent research which reflects a scientific approach. In addition to a written final thesis, a public oral examination is conducted to test the student's ability to defend the thesis.
EXCI 690 Thesis (Clinical Exercise Physiology) (33 credits)
Prerequisite: EXCI 626.
Students are required to demonstrate their ability to carry out independent research which reflects a scientific approach. In addition to a written final thesis, a public oral examination is conducted to test the student's ability to defend the thesis.
EXCI 698 Selected Topics in Exercise Science (3 credits)
This course explores themes within the area of Exercise Science.
HIST 877 Comprehensive Minor Field Tutorial (3 credits)
Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course provided that the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. HIST 877A, HIST 877B, etc.
HIST 878 Comprehensive Major Field Tutorial (6 credits)
HIST 880 Comprehensive Examinations (12 credits)
HIST 885 PhD Thesis Proposal and Colloquium (6 credits)
HIST 889 Doctoral Seminar (6 credits)
HIST 890 Thesis Research (54 credits)
HIST 600 The Nature of Historical Knowledge (3 credits)
This course examines the history of the discipline and the nature of historical knowledge, as well as contemporary debates about the meaning and practice of history. The content varies from term to term depending on the instructor(s). The material covered may include the following: research tools (e.g. library resources, the archives and the Internet), major approaches to history (e.g. Marxist, Annaliste, feminist), the debate about objectivity and truth in history, public history (history in film, television, schools, museums), and the impact of postmodernism on historical practice.
HIST 601 Historical Research Methods (3 credits)
This course guides students in the intial stages of developing an MA thesis topic and elaborating a substantial research proposal.
European History
HIST 610 Selected Topics in European History (3 credits)
Canadian History
HIST 620 Selected Topics in Canadian History (3 credits)
United States History
HIST 630 Selected Topics in US History (3 credits)
Latin American and Caribbean History
HIST 634 Selected Topics in Latin American and Caribbean History (3 credits)
Asian History
HIST 638 Selected Topics in Asian History (3 credits)
Middle Eastern History
HIST 642 Selected Topics in Middle Eastern History (3 credits)
African History
HIST 646 Selected Topics in African History (3 credits)
History of Genocide and Human Rights
HIST 650 Selected Topics in the History of Genocide and Human Rights (3 credits)
History of Gender and Sexuality
HIST 660 Selected Topics in the History of Gender and Sexuality (3 credits)
Public History
HIST 665 Selected Topics in Public History (3 credits)
Selected Areas of History
HIST 670 Selected Topics in History (3 credits)
HIST 679 Tutorial in a Selected Area of History (3 credits)
Research, Theses, and Comprehensive Examinations
HIST 685 MA Thesis (30 credits)
HUMA 891 Comprehensive Examination Major Field (3 credits)
HUMA 892 Comprehensive Examination Minor Field I (3 credits)
HUMA 893 Comprehensive Examination Minor Field II (3 credits)
Thesis Proposal with Defence (HUMA 894). Upon completion of the required coursework and three comprehensive field examinations, students are admitted to candidacy following acceptance by their advisory committee of the written thesis proposal and its successful oral defence. The thesis proposal should be integrative in character, bringing the student’s three fields to bear on the thesis project and laying the groundwork for the thesis.
Thesis (HUMA 895). A doctoral thesis should be based on extensive research in primary sources, make a significant and original contribution to knowledge, and be presented in a manner that conceptually and formally accords with scholarly standards. Students may produce a research-creation thesis with the approval of the student’s advisory committee and the Humanities Program Director. In accordance with the thesis guidelines of the School of Graduate Studies, a research-creation thesis normally comprises two synthesized components: a creative production component (which may be presented in a variety of media, communicative, or performative platforms) and a written scholarly component. The written scholarly component of the research-creation thesis should demonstrate substantial knowledge of the relevant scholarly literature, consider methodological issues, and present a contribution to knowledge. In addition, the research-creation thesis must demonstrate knowledge of prevailing practices and precedents in the practical field of activity in which the creative production component situates itself, and may reflect on the production process.
Language Requirement. Prior to submission of their thesis, doctoral candidates are required to demonstrate an ability to read and translate scholarly material in at least one language (other than the language of their thesis) relevant to their studies.
Academic Regulations
Academic Standing. Please refer to the Academic Standing section of the Calendar for a detailed review of the Academic Regulations.
Residence. The minimum residence requirement is two years (6 terms) of full-time study, or the equivalent in part-time study.
Time Limit. Please refer to the Academic Regulation page for further details regarding the Time Limit requirements.
Graduation Requirement. In order to graduate, students must have a cumulative GPA of at least 3.00.
Courses
Required Courses
HUMA 888 Seminar in Interdisciplinary Studies I (3 credits)
A required core seminar to be taken by all students within their first year in the program. This course engages with theories and methods of interdisciplinarity germane to the humanities, social sciences and fine arts, including those pertinent to research-creation. Its objectives include enhancing awareness of the role of conceptual frameworks and institutional practices in the shaping of interdisciplinary scholarly and creative explorations, and providing students with opportunities to begin pursuing theoretical and methodological issues vital to their individual interdisciplinary projects.
HUMA 889 Seminar in Interdisciplinary Studies II (3 credits)
A required core seminar to be taken by all students within their first year in the program. Each year a different topic or approach is selected with the aim of exploring how it is pursued and challenged across disciplinary boundaries.
Elective Courses
HUMA 884 Directed Studies (3 credits)
A directed study course provides students with the opportunity to pursue advanced and focused work with individual faculty members in the fields that constitute the student's program of study. Directed study courses are designated by the course topic.
HUMA 887 Advanced Seminar in Special Topics in Interdisciplinary Studies (3 credits)
This seminar examines in-depth special topics in interdisciplinary studies.
Note: The content varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may reregister for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated by the course topic following the HUMA 887 course title.
Comprehensive Examinations and Thesis
HUMA 891 Comprehensive Examination Major Field (3 credits)
HUMA 892 Comprehensive Examination Minor Field I (3 credits)
HUMA 893 Comprehensive Examination Minor Field II (3 credits)
HUMA 894 Thesis Proposal with Defence (6 credits)
HUMA 895 Thesis (57 credits)
JOUR 601 Critical Approaches to Journalistic Thought (3 credits)
JOUR 604 Research Methods for Journalism (3 credits)
JOUR 605 Digital Innovation in Journalism (3 credits)
Choose two of the following elective courses:
JOUR 502 Introduction to Reporting (3 credits)
JOUR 503 Introduction to Visual Journalism (3 credits)
JOUR 511 Introduction to Multimedia (3 credits)
JOUR 523 News and Feature Photography (3 credits)
JOUR 603 Political Economy of Journalism (3 credits)
JOUR 610 International Journalism (3 credits)
JOUR 620 Journalism Ethics and the Law (3 credits)
JOUR 630 Mediating Diversity through Audio Story-telling (3 credits)
JOUR 640 Textual Approaches to Journalism (3 credits)
JOUR 642 Special Topics in Journalism Studies (3 credits)
JOUR 645 Directed Study (3 credits)
* With the permission of the department, up to six elective credits may be taken in 600-level courses offered by other departments.
Research Requirements and Options.
Option A.
JOUR 650 Journalism Readings and Proposal (6 credits)
JOUR 691 Thesis (24 credits)
OR
Option B.
JOUR 650 Journalism Readings and Proposal (6 credits)
JOUR 693 Research-Creation Thesis (24 credits)
OR
Option C.
JOUR 694 Essay (18 credits)
12 additional course credits in consultation with the student’s faculty advisor and approved by the Department’s MA program director.
Academic Regulations
Academic Standing. Please refer to the Academic Standing section of the Calendar for a detailed review of the Academic Regulations.
Residence. The minimum residence requirement is one year (3 terms) of full-time study, or the equivalent in part-time study
Time Limit. Please refer to the Academic Regulation page for further details regarding the Time Limit requirements.
Graduation Requirement. In order to graduate, students must have a cumulative GPA of at least 2.70.
Courses
JOUR 502 Introduction to Reporting (3 credits)
This is a comprehensive lecture/laboratory course which lays the foundations for the writing and reporting demands of journalism. Students are introduced to the salient features of print and digital formats, and receive assignments in information-gathering and writing both in class and in the field.
JOUR 503 Introduction to Visual Journalism (3 credits)
This workshop course lays the foundation for the visual aspects of journalistic story-telling. Working with digital, single-lens reflex cameras, students acquire fundamental skills for the practice of visual journalism, becoming familiar with a variety of aesthetic, technical, ethical and theoretical concerns involved in the visual production of meaning.
JOUR 511 Introduction to Multimedia (3 credits)
This course is an introduction to the use of technology across audio and visual news platforms, including audio, visual and digital equipment and software. Students learn the necessary professional, technical and aesthetic skills to produce editorially sound audio and visual stories.
JOUR 523 News and Feature Photography (3 credits)
This workshop course covers a range of journalistic topics – hard news, general news, features, arts, sports – to emphasize the thematic particularities of visual story-telling. The course requires students to consider and incorporate the narrative and representative dimensions of visual journalism through a variety of assignments.
JOUR 601 Critical Approaches to Journalistic Thought (3 credits)
This course  introduces students to a scholarly critique of journalism, both as a practice and as an institution. Students examine specific readings from an overlapping social, political and economic context to consider the role of journalists as cultural producers.
JOUR 603 Political Economy of Journalism (3 credits)
This course considers journalism through its organization as a cultural industry and critically evaluates journalism’s economic structures and the impact those structures have on journalism practice. Topics may include media economics, free-market theory, media ownership, the role of the government and the role of organized labour.
JOUR 604 Research Methods for Journalism (3 credits)
This course examines a variety of research methods commonly used in the production and study of journalism, from both qualitative and quantitative perspectives. Emphasis is placed on primary sources, access to information requests, and electronic databases with a goal of helping students develop their own research practice.
JOUR 605 Digital Innovation in Journalism (3 credits)
This course offers lectures and workshops in digital innovation and web design, with a focus on design features related to journalism production and news platforms.
JOUR 610 International Journalism (3 credits)
Prerequisite: JOUR 601 previously or concurrently.
This course examines journalism as a cross-cultural and global practice, addressing such issues as media representation, multiculturalism, globalization and international news flows.
JOUR 620 Journalism Ethics and the Law (3 credits)
Prerequisite: JOUR 601 previously or concurrently or permission of the program director.
This course examines the journalist’s responsibility in terms of both ethics and the law. It introduces students to a representative cross-section of ethical theories and codes and takes an intensive look at the most common legal issues affecting the practice of journalism.
JOUR 630 Mediating Diversity through Audio Story-telling (3 credits)
Prerequisite: JOUR 601 previously or concurrently or permission of the program director.
The course is an experiential workshop that blends journalism theory and practice. Students function both as reporters, in order to learn the skills necessary to produce robust audio stories, and digital researchers tasked with examining diversity and media representation issues arising in class to explore journalism’s mediating function in society.
JOUR 640 Textual Approaches to Journalism (3 credits)
Prerequisite: JOUR 601 previously or concurrently.
This course concentrates on journalism’s use of all forms of language, from written text to sounds and images. Drawing from the literature on linguistics, semiotics, textual and discourse analysis, students consider ways in which journalists, through their use of language to describe and depict people, events, institutions and ideas, become implicated in the news they report.
JOUR 642 Special Topics in Journalism Studies (3 credits)
This seminar permits the in-depth examination of particular special topics in digital innovation in journalism studies. Topics vary from year to year.
JOUR 645 Directed Study (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the MA Program Director.
Students may enrol in a directed study under faculty supervision in order to undertake a specialized study of theoretical or research-related topics.
JOUR 650 Journalism Readings and Proposal (6 credits)
Prerequisite: JOUR 601.
In consultation with the faculty advisor, the student reviews relevant literature pertinent to the research topic and writes a thesis proposal demonstrating knowledge based upon the review of the scholarly literature.
JOUR 691 Thesis (24 credits)
Prerequisite: JOUR 650.
The thesis is researched and written under the direction of a supervisor. Upon completion, it is submitted to the student’s Thesis Committee. The thesis is defended in an oral examination before the Thesis Committee.
JOUR 693 Research-Creation Thesis (24 credits)
Prerequisite: JOUR 650.
The Research-Creation Thesis is specifically designed for students with media production experience who wish to complete an original media production using a suitable media platform, complemented by a text of approximately 10,000 words comprising a literature and media review, a theoretical and methodological contextualization, and a critical reflection on the project and its outcomes.
JOUR 694 Essay (18 credits)
Prerequisites: JOUR 601, 604, 605.
Students produce an essay on a research topic developed in consultation with a  faculty member that explores a specific issue relevant to journalism studies. The final essay must be evaluated by a second faculty member. The essay's length is approximately 40 pages, which does not include a bibliography. The course is normally taken in term five of the students' degree.
JOUR 500 Critical Approaches to Journalism (3 credits)
This course introduces students to a scholarly critique of journalism, both as a practice and as an institution. By interrogating specific readings, students are encouraged to consider the journalist as a cultural producer operating within overlapping social, political and economic contexts.
JOUR 501 Research Methods for Journalism (3 credits)
This course introduces students to research methods with a focus on primary sources, such as official documents, legal and financial records, access to information requests, electronic databases, as well as in-depth interviews. These methods are treated as both sources of story ideas and as essential elements of good reporting.
JOUR 502 Introduction to Reporting (3 credits)
This is a comprehensive lecture/laboratory course which lays the foundations for the writing and reporting demands of journalism. Students are introduced to the salient features of print and digital formats, and receive assignments in information-gathering and writing both in class and in the field.
JOUR 504 Intermediate Reporting (3 credits)
Prerequisite: JOUR 502.
This course is intended to consolidate the reporting and writing skills learned during the summer. Through lectures and laboratory work, students expand their knowledge of information-gathering and writing techniques, including short deadline news reporting and feature writing.
JOUR 505 Advanced Reporting (3 credits)
This workshop offers students the opportunity to perfect their reporting and writing skills and to undertake long form writing projects, ranging from beat reporting to magazine writing.
JOUR 508 Research Project (3 credits)
The project is to be a comprehensive study and report on some area of modern media practice, or on the interaction of media and society. The subject and method must be approved in advance by the instructor of the course.
JOUR 510 Web Editing and Page Design (3 credits)
Prerequisite: JOUR 501.
This course offers lectures and workshops in web editing and page design. Specific focus is given to design features related to journalism production and news platforms.
JOUR 511 Introduction to Multimedia (3 credits)
This course is an introduction to the use of technology across audio and visual news platforms, including audio, visual and digital equipment and software. Students learn the necessary professional, technical and aesthetic skills to produce editorially sound audio and visual stories.
JOUR 513 Journalism Ethics and the Law (3 credits)
This course examines the journalist’s responsibility in terms of both ethics and the law. It introduces students to a representative cross-section of ethical theories and codes and takes an intensive look at the most common legal issues affecting the practice of journalism.
JOUR 528 The Digital Magazine (3 credits)
This course requires students to produce the Department’s Digital Magazine. The course replicates the working conditions and journalistic experience of a digital newsroom. Students are expected to work in editorial teams to create current and update multimedia content throughout the term.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a JOUR 525 number may not take this course for credit.
JOUR 530 Advanced Radio News (3 credits)
This is a workshop course in which students function as reporters, writers, news readers and editors in order to learn the skills necessary to produce daily newscasts.
JOUR 532 Documentary Video and Radio (3 credits)
This workshop allows students to perfect their skills in long format public affairs broadcasting in sound and pictures. Students learn the fundamentals of documentary production including story developments and treatment,cinematographic style, interviewing, editing and presentation.
JOUR 536 Advanced Video Journalism (3 credits)
This course gives students the opportunity to perfect their skills in writing and reporting for video journalism and producing news and public affairs programming.
JOUR 542 International Journalism (3 credits)
This course examines the way journalism is practiced in a selected country or tradition. The focus of the course may change from year to year.
JOUR 566 Photojournalism (3 credits)
Using digital cameras and technology, students perform a variety of exercises and assignments to help them master the techniques used in planning, taking, and laying out news photographs.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a JOUR 525 number may not take this course for credit.
JOUR 500 Critical Approaches to Journalism (3 credits)
This course introduces students to a scholarly critique of journalism, both as a practice and as an institution. By interrogating specific readings, students are encouraged to consider the journalist as a cultural producer operating within overlapping social, political and economic contexts.
JOUR 501 Research Methods for Journalism (3 credits)
This course introduces students to research methods with a focus on primary sources, such as official documents, legal and financial records, access to information requests, electronic databases, as well as in-depth interviews. These methods are treated as both sources of story ideas and as essential elements of good reporting.
JOUR 502 Introduction to Reporting (3 credits)
This is a comprehensive lecture/laboratory course which lays the foundations for the writing and reporting demands of journalism. Students are introduced to the salient features of print and digital formats, and receive assignments in information-gathering and writing both in class and in the field.
JOUR 503 Introduction to Visual Journalism (3 credits)
This workshop course lays the foundation for the visual aspects of journalistic story-telling. Working with digital, single-lens reflex cameras, students acquire fundamental skills for the practice of visual journalism, becoming familiar with a variety of aesthetic, technical, ethical and theoretical concerns involved in the visual production of meaning.
JOUR 507 Basics of Digital Imaging (3 credits)
This workshop course introduces students to the fundamental concepts of editing news photographs. Working with actual news photographs and editing software, students learn to weigh aesthetic and technical considerations with the ethical and theoretical aspects involved in the visual production of meaning.
JOUR 508 Research Project (3 credits)
The project is to be a comprehensive study and report on some area of modern media practice, or on the interaction of media and society. The subject and method must be approved in advance by the instructor of the course.
JOUR 511 Introduction to Multimedia (3 credits)
This course is an introduction to the use of technology across audio and visual news platforms, including audio, visual and digital equipment and software. Students learn the necessary professional, technical and aesthetic skills to produce editorially sound audio and visual stories.
JOUR 513 Journalism Ethics and the Law (3 credits)
This course examines the journalist’s responsibility in terms of both ethics and the law. It introduces students to a representative cross-section of ethical theories and codes and takes an intensive look at the most common legal issues affecting the practice of journalism.
JOUR 521 Visual Story-Telling (3 credits)
This workshop introduces students to the dynamic and aural elements of visual story-telling in the context of multi-platform journalism. Students acquire technical skills of video and sound capture through instruction that brings to bear aesthetic, ethical and theoretical considerations.
JOUR 523 News and Feature Photography (3 credits)
This workshop course covers a range of journalistic topics – hard news, general news, features, arts, sports – to emphasize the thematic particularities of visual story-telling. The course requires students to consider and incorporate the narrative and representative dimensions of visual journalism through a variety of assignments.
JOUR 527 Elements of Lighting for Visual Journalism (3 credits)
This workshop course introduces students to lighting techniques for both still photography and video story-telling. Students learn to weigh technical and aesthetic aspects of lighting with the ethical and theoretical dimensions involved in the manipulation or alteration of the shooting environment.
JOUR 528 The Digital Magazine (3 credits)
This course requires students to produce the Department’s Digital Magazine. The course replicates the working conditions and journalistic experience of a digital newsroom. Students are expected to work in editorial teams to create current and update multimedia content throughout the term.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a JOUR 525 number may not take this course for credit.
JOUR 531 Visual Journalism Photo Editing (3 credits)
This advanced workshop course covers the decision-making process for news, magazine and online photography, treating photo editing as a collaborative element of visual journalism. Moving beyond aesthetic and technical aspects, it situates editing within the larger context of news production, such as collaborating with reporters, editors and photo editors in the story-telling process.
JOUR 532 Documentary Video and Radio (3 credits)
This workshop allows students to perfect their skills in long format public affairs broadcasting in sound and pictures. Students learn the fundamentals of documentary production including story developments and treatment,cinematographic style, interviewing, editing and presentation.
JOUR 535 Documentary and Photographic Series (3 credits)
This advanced workshop course concentrates on the photo story, the editorial essay and the documentary essay. The course emphasizes pre-visualization, planning, logistics and realization as well as optimizing series for newspaper, magazine and online publications.
JOUR 536 Advanced Video Journalism (3 credits)
This course gives students the opportunity to perfect their skills in writing and reporting for video journalism and producing news and public affairs programming.
JOUR 537 Visual Journalism Portfolio (3 credits)
This advanced capstone workshop focuses on students creating professional portfolios, helping them create and establish their individual brands as professional visual journalists.
MAST 830 Cyclotomic Fields (3 credits)
L-series, Dirichlet theorem, Gauss sums, Stickelberger theorem, class groups and class number, circular units, analytic formulae.
MAST 831 Class Field Theory (3 credits)
Local and global class field theory, ideles and adeles, reciprocity laws, existence theorem.
MAST 832 Elliptic Curves (3 credits)
Introduction to elliptic curves over finite fields, local and global fields, rational points, Mordell-Weil theorem, formal groups.
MAST 833 Selected Topics in Number Theory (3 credits)
MAST 834 Selected Topics in Computational Algebra (3 credits)
Analysis
MAST 837 Selected Topics in Analysis (3 credits)
MAST 838 Selected Topics in Pure Mathematics (3 credits)
Mathematical Physics and Differential Geometry
MAST 840 Lie Groups (3 credits)
The mathematical theory of Lie groups and introduction to their representation theory with applications to mathematical physics. Topics will include classical Lie groups, one-parameter subgroups, Lie algebras and the exponential mapping, adjoint and coadjoint representations, roots and weights, the Killing form, semi-direct products, Haar measure and decompositions such as those of Cartan and Iwasawa. The theory of unitary representations on Hilbert spaces. Physical applications of compact Lie groups (such as SU(2) and SU(3)) and non-compact groups (such as the Lorentz and Poincaré groups).
MAST 841 Partial Differential Equations (P.D.E.’s) (3 credits)
Introduction to the mathematical theory of P.D.E.’s, including applications to mathematical physics. Topics will include Sturm-Liouville systems, boundary value and eigenvalue problems, Green’s functions for time-independent and time-dependent equations, Laplace and Fourier transform methods. Additional topics will be selected from the theory of elliptic equations (e.g. Laplace and Poisson equations), hyperbolic equations (e.g., the Cauchy problem for the wave equation) and parabolic equations (e.g., the Cauchy problem for the heat equation). Links will be made with the theory of differential operators and with analysis on manifolds.
MAST 851 Differential Geometric Methods in Physics (3 credits)
Manifolds, differential systems, Riemannian, Kahlerian and symplectic geometry, bundles, supermanifolds with applications to relativity, quantization, gauge field theory and Hamiltonian systems.
MAST 852 Algebro-Geometric Methods in Physics (3 credits)
Algebraic curves, Jacobi varieties, theta functions, moduli spaces of holomorphic bundles and algebraic curves, rational maps, sheaves and cohomology with applications to gauge theory, relativity and integrable systems.
MAST 853 Gauge Theory and Relativity (3 credits)
Yang-Mills theory, connections of fibre bundles, spinors, twistors, classical solutions, invariance groups, instantons, monopoles, topological invariants, Einstein equations, equations of motion, Kaluza-Klein, cosmological models, gravitational singularities.
MAST 854 Quantization Methods (3 credits)
Geometric quantization, Borel quantization, Mackey quantization, stochastic and phase space quantization, the problems of prequantization and polarization, deformation theory, dequantization.
MAST 855 Spectral Geometry (3 credits)
Schrödinger operators; min-max characterization of eigenvalues, geometry of the spectrum in parameter space, kinetic potentials, spectral approximation theory, linear combinations and smooth transformations of potentials, applications to the N-body problem.
MAST 856 Selected Topics in Mathematical Physics (3 credits)
MAST 857 Selected Topics in Differential Geometry (3 credits)
Dynamical Systems
MAST 860 Differentiable Dynamical Systems (3 credits)
The study of dynamical properties of diffeomorphisms or of one-parameter groups of diffeomorphisms (flows) defined on differentiable manifolds. Periodic points, the non-wandering set, and more general invariant sets. Smale’s horseshoe, Anosov, and Morse-Smale systems, general hyperbolic systems, the stable manifold theorem, various forms of stability, Markov partitions and symbolic dynamics.
MAST 861 Absolutely Continuous Invariant Measures (3 credits)
Review of functional analysis, Frobenius-Perron operator and its properties, existence of absolutely continuous invariant measures for piecewise expanding transformations, properties of invariant densities, compactness of invariant densities, spectral decomposition of the Frobenius-Perron operator, bounds on the number of absolutely continuous invariant measures, perturbations of absolutely continuous invariant measures.
MAST 862 Numerical Analysis of Nonlinear Problems (3 credits)
Continuation of solutions, homotopy methods, asymptotic stability, bifurcations, branch switching, limit points and higher order singularities, Hopf bifurcation, control of nonlinear phenomena, ODE with boundary and integral constraints, discretization, numerical stability and multiplicity, periodic solutions, Floquet multipliers, period doubling, tori, control of Hopf bifurcation and periodic solutions, travelling waves, rotations, bifurcation phenomena in partial differential equations, degenerate systems.
MAST 863 Bifurcation Theory of Vector Fields (3 credits)
Local and global bifurcations. Generalized Hopf bifurcation and generalized homoclinic bifurcation. Hamiltonian systems and systems close to Hamiltonian systems, local codimension two bifurcations of flows.
MAST 865 Selected Topics in Dynamical Systems (3 credits)
Statistics and Actuarial Mathematics
MAST 871 Advanced Probability Theory (3 credits)
Definition of probability spaces, review of convergence concepts, conditioning and the Markov property, introduction to stochastic processes and martingales.
MAST 872 Stochastic Processes (3 credits)
Stochastic sequences, martingales and semi-martingales, Gaussian processes, processes with independent increments, Markov processes, limit theorems for stochastic processes.
MAST 873 Advanced Statistical Inference (3 credits)
Decision functions, randomization, optimal decision rules, the form of Bayes’ rule for estimation problems, admissibility and completeness, minimax, rules, invariant statistical decisions, admissible and minimax decision rules, uniformly most powerful tests, unbiased tests, locally best tests, general linear hypothesis, multiple decision problems.
MAST 874 Advanced Multivariate Inference (3 credits)
Wishart distribution, analysis of dispersion , tests of linear hypotheses, Rao’s test for additional information, test for dimensionality, principal component analysis, discriminant analysis, Mahalanobis distance, cluster analysis, relations with sets of variates.
MAST 875 Advanced Sampling (3 credits)
Unequal probability sampling, multistage sampling, super population models, Bayes and empirical Bayes estimation, estimation of variance from complex surveys, non-response errors and multivariate auxiliary information.
MAST 876 Survival Analysis (3 credits)
Failure time models, inference in parametric models, proportional hazards, non-parametric inference, multivariate failure time data, competing risks.
MAST 877 Reliability Theory (3 credits)
Reliability performance measures, unrepairable systems, repairable systems, load-strength reliability models, distributions with monotone failure rates, analysis of performance effectiveness, optimal redundancy, heuristic methods in reliability.
MAST 878 Advanced Risk Theory (3 credits)
Generalizations of the classical risk model, renewal processes, Cox processes, diffusion models, ruin theory and optimal surplus control.
MAST 881 Selected Topics in Probability, Statistics and Actuarial Mathematics (3 credits)
Seminars
MAST 858 Seminar in Mathematical Physics (3 credits)
MAST 859 Seminar in Differential Geometry (3 credits)
MAST 868 Seminar in Dynamical Systems (3 credits)
MAST 889 Seminar in Probability, Statistics and Actuarial Mathematics (3 credits)
MAST 898 Seminar in Number Theory (3 credits)
MAST 899 Seminar in Computational Algebra (3 credits)
Thesis and Comprehensive Examinations
MAST 890 Comprehensive Examination A (6 credits)
MAST 891 Comprehensive Examination B (6 credits)
MAST 892 Doctoral Thesis (60 credits)
MAST 651 The Contributions of Mathematics to Intellectual Life (3 credits)
This course examines several major mathematical advances over the centuries in the historical and intellectual contexts of the day and also focuses on the developments of a particular branch of mathematics over the more recent past. Examples may include recent advances in number theory and geometry leading to a proof of Fermat’s Last Theorem and applications of number theory to cryptography.
MAST 652 Topics in Research in Mathematics Education (3 credits)
The general aim of this course is to acquaint students with research problems in mathematics education and ways of approaching them (theoretical frameworks and research methodologies).
Note: The content varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course provided the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated by the title of the course.
MAST 653 Topics in the Foundations of Mathematics (3 credits)
This course focuses on foundational issues and developments in mathematics, with topics chosen from particular branches of mathematics, e.g., geometry (Euclidean and non-Euclidean geometries; comparison of Euclid’s “Elements” with Hilbert’s “Grundlagen der Geometrie”, etc.), or logic (evolution of logic from Aristotle to Boole; Hilbert’s program; Gödel’s Incompleteness theorems, etc.). It may also look at foundational problems in mathematics suggested by physics and other sciences. More general, philosophical, epistemological and methodological questions about the nature of mathematics may also be chosen as topics for the course.
Note: The content varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course provided the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated by the title of the course.
MAST 654 Topics in the History of Mathematics (3 credits)
This course may focus on a particular epoch and place in the history of mathematics (e.g., Ancient Greek, Indian and Chinese mathematics; the development of mathematics in Europe in the 17th to 19th centuries, etc.), or on the history of a particular area of mathematics (history of geometry, algebra, analysis, number theory, etc.). Aspects related to the history of approaches to teaching mathematics may also be addressed.
Note: The content varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course provided the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated bythe title of the course.
Topology and Geometry
MAST 655 Topology (3 credits)
Topological spaces. Order, product, subspace, quotient topologies. Continuous functions. Compactness and connectedness. The fundamental group and covering spaces.
MAST 656 Differential Geometry (3 credits)
Mappings, functions and vectors fields on Rn, inverse and implicit function theorem, differentiable manifolds, immersions, submanifolds, Lie groups, transformation groups, tangent and cotangent bundles, vector fields, flows, Lie derivatives, Frobenius’ theorem, tensors, tensor fields, differential forms, exterior differential calculus, partitions of unity, integration on manifolds, Stokes’ theorem, Poincaré lemma, introduction to symplectic geometry and Hamiltonian systems.
MAST 657 Manifolds (3 credits)
MAST 658 Lie Groups (3 credits)
Analysis
MAST 661 Topics in Analysis (3 credits)
MAST 662 Functional Analysis I (3 credits)
This course will be an introduction to the theory of Hilbert spaces and the spectral analysis of self-adjoint and normal operators on Hilbert spaces. Applications could include Stone’s theorem on one parameter groups and/or reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces.
MAST 663 Introduction to Ergodic Theory (3 credits)
This course covers the following topics: measurable transformations, functional analysis review, the Birkhoff Ergodic Theorem, the Mean Ergodic Theorem, recurrence, ergodicity, mixing, examples, entrophy, invariant measures and existence of invariant measures.
MAST 664 Dynamical Systems (3 credits)
An introduction to the range of dynamical behaviour exhibited by one-dimensional dynamical systems. Recurrence, hyperbolicity, chaotic behaviour, topological conjugacy, structural stability, and bifurcation theory for one-parameter families of transformation. The study of unimodal functions on the interval such as the family Fr (X) = rx (1-x), where 0 ≤ r ≤ 4 . For general continuous maps of the interval, the structure of the set of periodic orbits, for example, is found in the theorem of Sarkovskii.
MAST 665 Complex Analysis (3 credits)
Review of Cauchy-Riemann equations, holomorphic and meromorphic functions, Cauchy integral theorem, calculus of residues, Laurent series, elementary multiple-valued functions, periodic meromorphic functions, elliptic functions of Jacobi and Wierstrass, elliptic integrals, theta functions. Riemann surfaces, uniformization, algebraic curves, abelian integrals, the Abel map, Riemann theta functions, Abel’s theorem, Jacobi varieties, Jacobi inversion problem. Applications to differential equations.
MAST 666 Differential Equations (3 credits)
MAST 667 Reading Course in Analysis (3 credits)
MAST 668 Transform Calculus (3 credits)
MAST 669 Measure Theory (3 credits)
Measure and integration, measure spaces, convergence theorems, Radon-Nikodem theorem, measure and outer measure, extension theorem, product measures, Hausdorf measure, Lp-spaces, Riesz theorem, bounded linear functionals on C(X), conditional expectations and martingales.
Statistics and Actuarial Mathematics
MAST 670 Mathematical Methods in Statistics (3 credits)
This course will discuss mathematical topics which may be used concurrently or subsequently in other statistics stream courses. The topics will come mainly from the following broad categories; 1) geometry of Euclidean space; 2) matrix theory and distribution of quadratic forms; 3) measure theory applications (Reimann-Stieltjes integrals); 4) complex variables (characteristic functions and inversion); 5) inequalities (Cauchy-Schwarz, Holder, Minkowski, etc.) and numerical techniques (Newton-Raphson algorithm, scoring method, statistical differentials); 6) some topics from probability theory.
MAST 671 Probability Theory (3 credits)
Axiomatic construction of probability; characteristic and generating functions; probabilistic models in reliability theory; laws of large numbers; infinitely divisible distributions; the asymptotic theory of extreme order statistics.
MAST 672 Statistical Inference I (3 credits)
Order statistics; estimation theory; properties of estimators; maximum likelihood method; Bayes estimation; sufficiency and completeness; interval estimation; shortest length confidence interval; Bayesian intervals; sequential estimation.
MAST 673 Statistical Inference II (3 credits)
Testing of hypotheses; Neyman-Pearson theory; optimal tests; linear hypotheses; invariance; sequential analysis.
MAST 674 Multivariate Analysis (3 credits)
An introduction to multivariate distributions will be provided; multivariate normal distribution and its properties will be investigated. Estimation and testing problems related with multivariate normal populations will be discussed with emphasis on Hotelling’s generalized T2 and Wishart distribution. Other multivariate techniques including MANOVA; canonical correlations and principal components may also be introduced.
MAST 675 Sample Surveys (3 credits)
A review of statistical techniques and simple random sampling, varying probability sampling, stratified sampling, cluster and systematic sampling-ratio and product estimators.
MAST 676 Linear Models (3 credits)
Matrix approach to development and prediction in linear models will be used. Statistical inferences on the parameters will be discussed after development of proper distribution theory. The concept of generalized inverse will be fully developed and analysis of variance models with fixed and mixed effects will be analyzed.
MAST 677 Time Series (3 credits)
Statistical analysis of time series in the time domain. Moving average and exponential smoothing methods to forecast seasonal and non-seasonal time series, construction of prediction intervals for future observations, Box-Jenkins ARIMA models and their applications to forecasting seasonal and non-seasonal time series. A substantial portion of the course will involve computer analysis of time series using computer packages (mainly MINITAB). No prior computer knowledge is required.
MAST 678 Statistical Consulting and Data Analysis (3 credits)
MAST 679 Topics in Statistics and Probability (3 credits)
MAST 720 Survival Analysis (3 credits)
Parametric and non-parametric failure time models; proportional hazards; competing risks.
MAST 721 Advanced Actuarial Mathematics (3 credits)
General risk contingencies; advanced multiple life theory; population theory; funding methods and dynamic control.
MAST 722 Advanced Pension Mathematics (3 credits)
Valuation methods, gains and losses, stochastic returns, dynamic control.
MAST 723 Portfolio Theory (3 credits)
Asset and liability management models, optimal portfolio selection, stochastic returns, special topics.
MAST 724 Risk Theory (3 credits)
General risk models; renewal processes; Cox processes; surplus control.
MAST 725 Credibility Theory (3 credits)
Classical, regression and hierarchical Bayes models, empirical credibility, robust credibility, special topics.
MAST 726 Loss Distributions (3 credits)
Heavy tailed distributions, grouped/censured data, point and interval estimation, goodness-of-fit, model selection.
MAST 727 Risk Classification (3 credits)
Cluster analysis, principal components, discriminant analysis, Mahalanobis distance, special topics.
MAST 728 Reading Course in Actuarial Mathematics (3 credits)
MAST 729 Selected Topics in Actuarial Mathematics (3 credits)
Applied Mathematics
MAST 680 Topics in Applied Mathematics (3 credits)
MAST 681 Optimization (3 credits)
Introduction to nonsmooth analysis: generalized directional derivative, generalized gradient, nonsmooth calculus; connections with convex analysis. Mathematical programming: optimality conditions; generalized multiplier approach to constraint qualifications and sensitivity analysis. Application of the theory: functions defined as pointwise maxima of a family of functions; minimizing the maximal eigenvalue of a matrix-valued function; variational analysis of an extended eigenvalue problem.
MAST 682 Matrix Analysis (3 credits)
Jordan canonical form and applications, Perron-Frobenius theory of nonnegative matrices with applications to economics and biology, generalizations to matrices which leave a cone invariant.
MAST 683 Numerical Analysis (3 credits)
This course consists of fundamental topics in numerical analysis with a bias towards analytical problems involving optimization integration, differential equations and Fourier transforms. The computer language C++ will be introduced and studied as part of this course; the use of “functional programming” and graphical techniques will be strongly encouraged. By the end of the course, students should have made a good start on the construction of a personal library of tools for exploring and solving mathematical problems numerically.
MAST 684 Quantum Mechanics (3 credits)
The aim of this course is two-fold: (i) to provide an elementary account of the theory of non-relativistic bound systems, and (ii) to give an introduction to some current research in this area, including spectral geometry.
MAST 685 Approximation Theory (3 credits)
MAST 686 Reading Course in Applied Mathematics (3 credits)
MAST 687 Control Theory (3 credits)
Linear algebraic background material, linear differential and control systems, controllability and observability, properties of the attainable set, the maximal principle and time-optimal control.
MAST 688 Stability Theory (3 credits)
MAST 689 Variational Methods (3 credits)
Algebra and Logic
MAST 691 Mathematical Logic (3 credits)
MAST 692 Advanced Algebra I (3 credits)
Field extensions, normality and separability, normal closures, the Galois correspondence, solution of equations by radicals, application of Galois theory, the fundamental theorem of algebra.
MAST 693 Algebraic Number Theory (3 credits)
Dedekind domains; ideal class groups; ramification; discriminant and different; Dirichlet unit theorem; decomposition of primes; local fields; cyclotomic fields.
MAST 694 Group Theory (3 credits)
Introduction to group theory, including the following topics: continuous and locally compact groups, subgroups and associated homogeneous spaces. Haar measures, quasi-invariant measures, group extensions and universal covering groups, unitary representations, Euclidean and Poincaré groups, square integrability of group representations with applications to image processing.
MAST 696 Advanced Algebra II (3 credits)
MAST 697 Reading Course in Algebra (3 credits)
MAST 698 Category Theory (3 credits)
MAST 699 Topics in Algebra (3 credits)
Thesis and Mathematical Literature
MAST 700 Thesis (27 credits)
MAST 701 Project (15 credits)
A student investigates a mathematical topic, prepares a report and gives a seminar presentation under the guidance of a faculty member.
MATH 603 Extended Project (9 credits)
A student investigates a mathematics education topic, prepares a report, and gives a seminar presentation under the guidance of a faculty member.
MATH 613 Topics in Number Theory
Topics are chosen from the area of Number Theory.
Note: The content varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated bythe title of the course.
MATH 616 Linear Algebra
This course is an extension of undergraduate courses in linear algebra, covering a selection of topics in advanced linear algebra (e.g. from the theory of general vector spaces, linear and multilinear algebras, matrix theory, etc.)
MATH 618 Topics in the Application of Mathematics
Topics are chosen from the area of the Application of Mathematics.
Note: The content varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated bythe title of the course.
MATH 621 Geometry
The course offers an insight into Euclidean and Non-Euclidean geometries.
MATH 622 Abstract Algebra
The course looks at objects such as numbers, polynomials, matrices or transformations from an algebraic-structural point of view. The course may aim at proving such “famous impossibilities” as squaring the circle, duplicating the cube, trisecting an angle or solving a polynomial equation of degree 5 or more by radicals.
MATH 624 Topics in Mathematics Education
This course is an overview and critical analysis of theories and technologies of mathematics teaching. Applications of the theories to studying and/or developing teaching situations or tools for specific mathematical topics are examined.
Note: The content varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated bythe title of the course.
MATH 625 Topology
The course develops elements of the theory of topological spaces and their transformations.
MATH 626 Analysis I
The course is an extension of undergraduate courses in mathematical analysis in the real domain (Analysis I, II; Real Analysis; Measure Theory). Students may substitute this course with any of the MAST 660-669 courses in the MA/MSc program.
MATH 627 Analysis II
The course is an extension of undergraduate courses in mathematical analysis in the complex domain (Complex Analysis I, II). Students may substitute this course with any of the MAST 660-669 courses in the MA/MSc program.
MATH 630 Topics in the Psychology of Mathematics Education
This course studies epistemological, cognitive, affective, social and cultural issues involved in mathematics.
Note: The content varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated bythe title of the course.
MATH 633 Applications of Technology in Mathematics Curriculum Development
This course is an overview of the impact of information and communication technology on curricula, textbooks and teaching approaches.
MATH 634 Computer Software and Mathematics Instruction
This course is an overview and critical evaluation of computer software designed for use in mathematics instruction.
MATH 637 Statistics and Probability
This course discusses theoretical and applied aspects of statistics and probability. Students may substitute this course with any of the MAST 670-677 courses in the MA/MSc program.
MATH 639 Topics in Technology in Mathematics Education
This course involves the elaboration, experimentation and critical analysis of individual projects of integration of ICT in mathematics education.
Note: The content varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated bythe title of the course.
MATH 640 Topics in Logic
Topics are chosen from the area of Mathematical Logic.
Note: The content varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated bythe title of the course.
MATH 641 Survey of Research in Mathematics Education
This course is an overview of recent results in mathematics education research.
MATH 642 Research Methods for Mathematics Education
This course is an overview of qualitative and quantitative methods in mathematics education research.
MATH 645 Topics in Mathematics Education Research
This course is an overview of research literature on a chosen topic or issue in mathematics education.
Note: The content varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated bythe title of the course.
MATH 646 Research Internship
Students conduct a pilot study or participate in a research project as a research assistant under the supervision of a senior researcher. The outcome is a written report of the study.
MATH 647 Readings in Mathematics Education II
The course is closely related to project or thesis writing. Its outcome is a section of the literature review chapter, focused on the student’s particular research question.
MATH 648 Topics in the History of Mathematics
Topics are chosen from the area of the History of Mathematics.
Note: The content varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated bythe title of the course.
MATH 649 Heuristics and Problem Solving
This course examines cognitive processes, tools and strategies involved in solving mathematical problems.
MATH 652 Seminar in Mathematics Education
This course is primarily a thesis or project preparation seminar but it is open to students in the Course Option as well. The research related to students’ research projects is presented and critically evaluated.
MATH 654 Thesis (15 credits)
Students are required to demonstrate their ability to carry out original, independent research. The thesis is researched and written under the direction of a supervisor and thesis committee. Upon completion of the thesis, the student is required to defend his/her thesis before the thesis committee.
PHIL 641 Philosophical Foundations of Biology (3 credits)
This course helps students critically engage biology’s philosophical foundations. Topics typically include the nature of scientific reasoning, testing, and evidence in biology; how best to discover, define, and apply biological concepts; and how to structure the aims of biology to fit our diverse and changing societies.
PHIL 643 Selected Topics in Metaphysics
Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course provided that the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. PHIL 643A, PHIL 643B, etc.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a PHIL 640 or PHIL 642 number may not take this course for credit.
PHIL 644 Philosophy of Science
This course provides an analysis of philosophical issues raised by science, such as those concerning scientific evidence, concepts, theories, and explanation; or the intersection with ethical and social problems.
Note: Students who have received credit for PHIL 650 or 657 may not take this course for credit.
PHIL 645 Philosophy of Mathematics
This course investigates some of the central issues and theories in the philosophy of mathematics such as logicism, intuitionism, or formalism. Other topics may include the nature of mathematical truth or the ontology and epistemology of mathematics.
PHIL 646 Philosophy of Language
Students analyse some aspects of the philosophy of language, such as the nature of meaning, the relation between language and thought, or the relation between language and the world.
Note: Students who have received credit for PHIL 651 may not take this course for credit.
PHIL 647 Philosophy of Mind
Students investigate central issues in the philosophy of mind, such as the architecture and modularity of the mind, the mind-body problem and mental causation, or the metaphysics and function of consciousness.
Note: Students who have received credit for PHIL 664 may not take this course for credit.
PHIL 648 Philosophy of Social Science
Students study methods of various social and human sciences and the differences in aims between, for instance, understanding, explaining, experiencing, and being liberated from oppression.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a PHIL 655 number may not take this course for credit.
PHIL 649 Phenomenology
Drawing from classical and recent phenomenlogical philosophy, students study selected central figures such as Husserl, Heidegger, and issues such as meaning, the body, temporality, and phenomenological reduction.
Note: Students who have received credit for PHIL 668 may not take this course for credit.
PHIL 652 Selected Topics in Logic
Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course provided that the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. PHIL 652A, PHIL 652B, etc.
Note: Students who have received credit for PHIL 611 may not take this course for credit.
PHIL 656 Selected Topics in Analytic Philosophy
Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course provided that the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. PHIL 656A, PHIL 656B, etc.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under PHIL 666 may not take this course for credit.
PHIL 658 Selected Topics in Continental Philosophy
Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course provided that the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. PHIL 658A, PHIL 658B, etc.
PHIL 659 Selected Topics in Metaphysics, Epistemology, or Philosophy of Science
Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course provided that the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. PHIL 659A, PHIL 659B, etc.
To be classified each year by the Graduate Program Director:
PHIL 672 Tutorial
PHIL 678 Topics in Current Research
PHIL 698 The Teaching of Philosophy
Research Paper and Thesis
PHIL 693 Research Paper (27 credits)
PHIL 696 Thesis (27 credits)
Cognate Courses
Students may enrol in certain courses in the Departments of Education, Political Science, and Religions and Cultures with permission of the Philosophy Graduate Program Director and the second department involved.
PHYS 861: Doctoral Seminar on Selected Topics I (3 credits), in which the candidates must present a pedagogical talk on a topic from physics to an advanced-level undergraduate student audience.
PHYS 862: Doctoral Seminar on Selected Topics II (3 credits), in which the candidates must present a talk related to their thesis research to a critical audience.
PHYS 870: Comprehensive Examination and Research Proposal (6 credits): The purpose of this course is to satisfy the department that the student is sufficiently prepared, in terms of background and ability, to pursue the research required for a PhD. Each student is required to prepare a written project in his/her field of research. The topic is general, and not part of the thesis work. The oral examination is based on the contents of this report. The Graduate Program Committee appoints an examination committee in consultation with the thesis supervisor. The supervisor is responsible for the subject chosen and also acts as a member of the examining committee for the oral presentation. The comprehensive examination must be completed within four months after the candidate's initial registration in the PhD program. The grade for this course is a Pass or Fail. In case of failure in the first attempt, only one more attempt is allowed to take place.
PHYS 890: Doctoral Research and Thesis (69 credits): A student who has passed the comprehensive examination is admitted to candidacy for the PhD degree. The student is allowed to continue working on a research project under the direction of a faculty member of the department only after passing the comprehensive examination. The research is in areas which reflect the interests of the faculty and the facilities of the department. The thesis must make a distinct and original contribution to knowledge, and be presented in acceptable literary form.
Academic Regulations
Academic Standing. Please refer to the Academic Standing section of the Calendar for a detailed review of the Academic Regulations.
Program Specific Requirements. Students must obtain an assessment grade point average (AGPA) of 3.00 based on a minimum of 6 credits.
Residence. The minimum period of residence is two years (6 terms) of full-time graduate study beyond the master’s degree, or the equivalent in part-time study, or three years (9 terms) of full-time graduate study beyond the bachelor’s degree for those students who are permitted to enrol for doctoral studies without completing a master’s degree.
Time Limit. Please refer to the Academic Regulation page for further details regarding the Time Limit requirements.
Graduation Requirement. In order to graduate, students must have a cumulative GPA of at least 3.00.
Courses
All courses are worth 3 credits each unless otherwise specified. The graduate courses offered by the Department of Physics fall into the following categories:
PHYS 600-609 Topics in Quantum and High Energy Physics
PHYS 630-639 Topics in Condensed Matter Physics
PHYS 640-649 Topics in Theoretical Physics
PHYS 660-669 Topics in Biomedical Physics
PHYS 670-679 Topics in Applied Physics
Topics in Quantum and High Energy Physics (600-609)
PHYS 601 Advanced Quantum Mechanics I (3 credits)
This course reviews the mathematical foundations of quantum mechanics, Heisenberg, Schroedinger, and interaction representations; time-dependent perturbation theory and the golden rule; collision theory, Born approximation, T-matrix and phase shifts; angular momentum theory: eigenvalues and eigenvectors, spherical harmonics, rotations and spin, additions theorems and their applications.
Note: Students who have received credit for PHYS 612 may not take this course for credit.
PHYS 602 Advanced Quantum Mechanics II (3 credits)
The following applications are examined: non-relativistic theory - systems of identical particles, second quantization, Hartree-Fock theory, as well as path integral formulation of quantum mechanics; relativistic theory: Dirac and Klein-Gordon equations, positron theory, propogator theory and their applications; field quantization, radiative effects, Dirac and Majorana spinors, Noether’s theorem.
Note: Students who have received credit for PHYS 613 may not take this course for credit.
PHYS 603 High Energy Physics (3 credits)
This course discusses symmetries and groups; antiparticles; electrodynamics of spinless particles, the Dirac equation and its implications for the electrodynamics of spin 1/2 particles. A general discussion of loops, renormalization and running coupling constants, hadronic structure and partons, is used to introduce the principles of Quantum Chromodynamics and Electroweak Interactions. The course concludes with an exposition of gauge symmetries, the Weinberg-Salam model, and Grand Unification.
Note: Students who have received credit for PHYS 616 may not take this course for credit.
PHYS 609 Selected Topics in Quantum or High Energy Physics (3 credits)
This course reflects the research interests of the physics faculty in quantum or high energy physics and/or those of the graduate students working with them.
Note: Students who have taken the same topic under PHYS 615, PHYS 618 or PHYS 619 may not take this course for credit.
Topics in Condensed Matter Physics (630-639)
PHYS 636 Condensed Matter Physics I (3 credits)
Review of electron levels in periodic potentials, various band-structure methods, Thomas-Fermi and Hartree-Fock theories, screening, anharmonic effects crystals, inhomogeneous semiconductors, p-n junctions, transistors. Dielectric properties of insulators, ferroelectric materials. Defects in crystals. Magnetic ordering, paramagnetism, diamagnetism, ferromagnetism, phase transitions, superconductivity.
PHYS 637 Condensed Matter Physics II (3 credits)
This course provides a review of the phonon modes and electron band structure of crystals. It covers a selection of modern quantum condensed‑matter topics which may include Hartree‑Fock, mesoscopic quantum transport theory (quantum dots, 1D systems, 2D systems), superconductivity, the quantum Hall effects, weak localization, and current research topics. Students further develop an in-depth knowledge of the course material through an individual project.
PHYS 639 Selected Topics in Condensed Matter Physics (3 credits)
This course reflects the research interests of the physics faculty in condensed matter physics and/or those of the graduate students working with them.
Note: Students who have received credit for PHYS 635 may not take this course for credit.
Topics in Theoretical Physics (640-649)
PHYS 642 Statistical Physics (3 credits)
This course covers statistical concepts, probability, Gaussian probability distribution, statistical ensemble, macrostates and microstates, thermodynamic probability, statistical thermodynamics, reversible and irreversible processes, entropy, thermodynamic laws and statistical relations, partition functions, Maxwell’s distribution, phase transformation, Maxwell-Boltzmann, Bose-Einstein and Fermi-Dirac statistics, quantum statistics in the classical limit, black-body radiation, conduction electrons in metals, interacting particle system, lattice vibrations, virial coefficients, Weiss molecular field approximation.
Note: Students who have received credit for PHYS 654 may not take this course for credit.
PHYS 644 Advanced Classical Mechanics and Relativity (3 credits)
This course covers generalized coordinates, Lagrange’s equations, method of Lagrange multipliers, variational formulation, Hamilton’s equations of motion, canonical transformations, Hamilton-Jacobi theory, special theory of relativity, Einstein’s axioms, Lorentz transformations, form invariance and tensors, four-vectors, gravity.
Note: Students who have received credit for PHYS 658 may not take this course for credit.
PHYS 646 Electrodynamics (3 credits)
This course covers the electrostatic boundary-value problem with Green’s function, Maxwell’s equations, energy-momentum tensor, guided waves, dielectric wave-guides, fibre optics, radiation static field, multipole radiation, velocity and acceleration field, Larmor’s formula, relativistic generalization, radiating systems, linear antenna, aperture in wave guide, scattering, Thompson scattering, Bremsstrahlung, Abraham-Lorentz equation, Breit-Wigner formula, Green’s function for Helmholtz’s equation. Noether’s theorem.
PHYS 648 Non Linear Waves (3 credits)
Linear stability analysis and limitations, modulated waves and nonlinear dispersion relations, Korteweg-de Vries, sine-Gordon, and nonlinear Schrödinger equations. Hydro-dynamic, transmission-line, mechanical, lattice, and optical solitions. Applications in optical fibres, Josephson junction arrays. Inverse scattering method, conservation laws.
PHYS 649 Selected Topics in Theoretical Physics (3 credits)
This course reflects the research interests of the Physics faculty in theoretical physics and/or those of the graduate students working with them.
Topics in Biomedical Physics (660-669)
PHYS 660 Chemical Aspects of Biophysics (3 credits)
This course examines several aspects of the stability of protein structures including bonding and nonbonding interactions, energy profiles, Ramachandran plot, stabilization through protonation-deprotonation, interaction of macromolecules with solvents, the thermodynamics of protein folding, and ligand binding. The Marcus-theory of biological electron transfer is discussed. The course also introduces the students to several modern biophysical techniques such as electronic spectroscopies (absorption, fluorescence), X-ray absorption spectroscopy, NMR and EPR spectroscopy, IR and Raman spectroscopy, circular dichroism, and differential scanning calorimetry. Students further develop an in-depth knowledge of the course material through an individual project.
PHYS 663 Quantitative Human Systems Physiology (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Open to all Science and Engineering program students.
This course addresses important concepts of quantitative systems physiology and the physical bases of physiological function in different organ systems. The student becomes familiar with the structure and functional principles of the main physiological systems, and how to quantify them. These include the nervous, cardiovascular, respiratory and muscular systems. Important biophysical principles and quantitative physiological methods are presented. Topics may include the biophysics of muscle contractions, fluid dynamics in the cardiovascular system, respiration gas exchange and neuronal communication, and how the biophysics of neuronal communications can be used to image brain activity. Students develop in-depth knowledge of how to apply these principles to a specific system through an individual project.
PHYS 665 Principles of Medical Imaging (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Open to all Science and Engineering program students.
This course aims to introduce the physical principles associated with important medical imaging techniques used in medicine and in neuroscience research. The objective is to cover the whole imaging process in detail starting from the body entities to be imaged (e.g. structure, function, blood flow, neuronal activity), to the physical principles of data acquisition and finally the methods used for image data reconstruction. Important imaging modalities such as X-ray and computer tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, nuclear medicine, ultrasound, electrophysiology and optical imaging techniques are presented. Students develop an in-depth understanding of how to apply this knowledge for a specific imaging modality through an individual project.
Topics in Applied Physics (670 - 679)
PHYS 679 Selected Topics in Applied Physics (3 credits)
This course reflects the research interests of the Physics faculty in Applied Physics and/or those of the graduate students working with them.
Seminar, Thesis, and Comprehensive Examination
PHYS 861 Doctoral Seminar on Selected Topics I (3 credits)
Students must present one pedagogical seminar on a topic from physics to an advanced-level undergraduate student audience. This course is evaluated on a pass/fail basis. No substitution is permitted.
PHYS 862 Doctoral Seminar on Selected Topics II (3 credits)
Students must present one seminar in their current research area to a critical audience. In addition, students are required to attend and participate in all departmental seminars. This course is evaluated on a pass/fail basis. No substitution is permitted.
PHYS 870 Comprehensive Examination and Research Proposal (6 credits)
PHYS 890 Doctoral Research and Thesis (69 credits)
Note: Students admitted prior to 1997-98 should register for PHYS 850 (70 credits). Students admitted after summer 1997 will register for PHYS 850 (66 credits).
PHYS 760: MSc Seminar on Selected Topics (3 credits). Students must give one seminar in the field of their research.
PHYS 790: Master’s Research and Thesis (33 credits): The thesis must represent the results of the student's original research work undertaken after admission to this program. Work previously published by the student may be used only as introductory or background subject matter. The thesis is examined by a departmental committee. An oral examination is conducted to test the candidate's ability to defend the thesis.
The thesis may be based on a study of a significant problem in physics or a research project conducted as part of the student’s employment. Permission to submit a thesis in the latter category is granted in the event that:
the student’s employer furnishes written approval for the pursuit and reporting of the project;
the student has research facilities which, in the opinion of the physics graduate studies committee, are adequate;
arrangements can be made for supervision of the project by a faculty member of the Department of Physics;
in all but exceptional cases, the student has direct supervision by a qualified supervisor at the site of the student’s employment. The supervisor must be approved by the physics graduate studies committee. A written working agreement between the supervisor and the university are required;
the proposed topic for the thesis, together with a brief statement outlining the proposed method of treatment, is approved by the physics graduate studies committee.
Academic Regulations
Academic Standing. Please refer to the Academic Standing section of the Calendar for a detailed review of the Academic Regulations.
Residence. The minimum residence requirement is one year (3 terms) of full-time study, or the equivalent in part-time study.
Time Limit. Please refer to the Academic Regulation page for further details regarding the Time Limit requirements.
Graduation Requirement. In order to graduate, students must have a cumulative GPA of at least 2.70.
Courses
All courses are worth 3 credits each unless otherwise specified. The graduate courses offered by the Department of Physics fall into the following categories:
PHYS 600-609 Topics in Quantum and High Energy Physics
PHYS 630-639 Topics in Condensed Matter Physics
PHYS 640-649 Topics in Theoretical Physics
PHYS 660-669 Topics in Biomedical Physics
PHYS 670-679 Topics in Applied Physics
Topics in Quantum and High Energy Physics (600-609)
PHYS 601 Advanced Quantum Mechanics I (3 credits)
This course reviews the mathematical foundations of quantum mechanics, Heisenberg, Schroedinger, and interaction representations; time-dependent perturbation theory and the golden rule; collision theory, Born approximation, T-matrix and phase shifts; angular momentum theory: eigenvalues and eigenvectors, spherical harmonics, rotations and spin, additions theorems and their applications.
Note: Students who have received credit for PHYS 612 may not take this course for credit.
PHYS 602 Advanced Quantum Mechanics II (3 credits)
The following applications are examined: non-relativistic theory - systems of identical particles, second quantization, Hartree-Fock theory, as well as path integral formulation of quantum mechanics; relativistic theory: Dirac and Klein-Gordon equations, positron theory, propogator theory and their applications; field quantization, radiative effects, Dirac and Majorana spinors, Noether’s theorem.
Note: Students who have received credit for PHYS 613 may not take this course for credit.
PHYS 603 High Energy Physics (3 credits)
This course discusses symmetries and groups; antiparticles; electrodynamics of spinless particles, the Dirac equation and its implications for the electrodynamics of spin 1/2 particles. A general discussion of loops, renormalization and running coupling constants, hadronic structure and partons, is used to introduce the principles of Quantum Chromodynamics and Electroweak Interactions. The course concludes with an exposition of gauge symmetries, the Weinberg-Salam model, and Grand Unification.
Note: Students who have received credit for PHYS 616 may not take this course for credit.
PHYS 609 Selected Topics in Quantum or High Energy Physics (3 credits)
This course reflects the research interests of the physics faculty in quantum or high energy physics and/or those of the graduate students working with them.
Note: Students who have taken the same topic under PHYS 615, PHYS 618 or PHYS 619 may not take this course for credit.
Topics in Condensed Matter Physics (630-639)
PHYS 636 Condensed Matter Physics I (3 credits)
Review of electron levels in periodic potentials, various band-structure methods, Thomas-Fermi and Hartree-Fock theories, screening, anharmonic effects crystals, inhomogeneous semiconductors, p-n junctions, transistors. Dielectric properties of insulators, ferroelectric materials. Defects in crystals. Magnetic ordering, paramagnetism, diamagnetism, ferromagnetism, phase transitions, superconductivity.
PHYS 637 Condensed Matter Physics II (3 credits)
This course provides a review of the phonon modes and electron band structure of crystals. It covers a selection of modern quantum condensed‑matter topics which may include Hartree‑Fock, mesoscopic quantum transport theory (quantum dots, 1D systems, 2D systems), superconductivity, the quantum Hall effects, weak localization, and current research topics. Students further develop an in-depth knowledge of the course material through an individual project.
PHYS 639 Selected Topics in Condensed Matter Physics (3 credits)
This course reflects the research interests of the physics faculty in condensed matter physics and/or those of the graduate students working with them.
Note: Students who have received credit for PHYS 635 may not take this course for credit.
Topics in Theoretical Physics (640-649)
PHYS 642 Statistical Physics (3 credits)
This course covers statistical concepts, probability, Gaussian probability distribution, statistical ensemble, macrostates and microstates, thermodynamic probability, statistical thermodynamics, reversible and irreversible processes, entropy, thermodynamic laws and statistical relations, partition functions, Maxwell’s distribution, phase transformation, Maxwell-Boltzmann, Bose-Einstein and Fermi-Dirac statistics, quantum statistics in the classical limit, black-body radiation, conduction electrons in metals, interacting particle system, lattice vibrations, virial coefficients, Weiss molecular field approximation.
Note: Students who have received credit for PHYS 654 may not take this course for credit.
PHYS 644 Advanced Classical Mechanics and Relativity (3 credits)
This course covers generalized coordinates, Lagrange’s equations, method of Lagrange multipliers, variational formulation, Hamilton’s equations of motion, canonical transformations, Hamilton-Jacobi theory, special theory of relativity, Einstein’s axioms, Lorentz transformations, form invariance and tensors, four-vectors, gravity.
Note: Students who have received credit for PHYS 658 may not take this course for credit.
PHYS 646 Electrodynamics (3 credits)
This course covers the electrostatic boundary-value problem with Green’s function, Maxwell’s equations, energy-momentum tensor, guided waves, dielectric wave-guides, fibre optics, radiation static field, multipole radiation, velocity and acceleration field, Larmor’s formula, relativistic generalization, radiating systems, linear antenna, aperture in wave guide, scattering, Thompson scattering, Bremsstrahlung, Abraham-Lorentz equation, Breit-Wigner formula, Green’s function for Helmholtz’s equation. Noether’s theorem.
PHYS 648 Non Linear Waves (3 credits)
Linear stability analysis and limitations, modulated waves and nonlinear dispersion relations, Korteweg-de Vries, sine-Gordon, and nonlinear Schrödinger equations. Hydro-dynamic, transmission-line, mechanical, lattice, and optical solitions. Applications in optical fibres, Josephson junction arrays. Inverse scattering method, conservation laws.
PHYS 649 Selected Topics in Theoretical Physics (3 credits)
This course reflects the research interests of the Physics faculty in theoretical physics and/or those of the graduate students working with them.
Topics in Biomedical Physics (660-669)
PHYS 660 Chemical Aspects of Biophysics (3 credits)
This course examines several aspects of the stability of protein structures including bonding and nonbonding interactions, energy profiles, Ramachandran plot, stabilization through protonation-deprotonation, interaction of macromolecules with solvents, the thermodynamics of protein folding, and ligand binding. The Marcus-theory of biological electron transfer is discussed. The course also introduces the students to several modern biophysical techniques such as electronic spectroscopies (absorption, fluorescence), X-ray absorption spectroscopy, NMR and EPR spectroscopy, IR and Raman spectroscopy, circular dichroism, and differential scanning calorimetry. Students further develop an in-depth knowledge of the course material through an individual project.
PHYS 663 Quantitative Human Systems Physiology (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Open to all Science and Engineering program students.
This course addresses important concepts of quantitative systems physiology and the physical bases of physiological function in different organ systems. The student becomes familiar with the structure and functional principles of the main physiological systems, and how to quantify them. These include the nervous, cardiovascular, respiratory and muscular systems. Important biophysical principles and quantitative physiological methods are presented. Topics may include the biophysics of muscle contractions, fluid dynamics in the cardiovascular system, respiration gas exchange and neuronal communication, and how the biophysics of neuronal communications can be used to image brain activity. Students develop in-depth knowledge of how to apply these principles to a specific system through an individual project.
PHYS 665 Principles of Medical Imaging (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Open to all Science and Engineering program students.
This course aims to introduce the physical principles associated with important medical imaging techniques used in medicine and in neuroscience research. The objective is to cover the whole imaging process in detail starting from the body entities to be imaged (e.g. structure, function, blood flow, neuronal activity), to the physical principles of data acquisition and finally the methods used for image data reconstruction. Important imaging modalities such as X-ray and computer tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, nuclear medicine, ultrasound, electrophysiology and optical imaging techniques are presented. Students develop an in-depth understanding of how to apply this knowledge for a specific imaging modality through an individual project.
Topics in Applied Physics (670 - 679)
PHYS 679 Selected Topics in Applied Physics (3 credits)
This course reflects the research interests of the Physics faculty in Applied Physics and/or those of the graduate students working with them.
Seminar, Thesis, and Comprehensive Examination
PHYS 760 MSc Seminar on Selected Topics (3 credits)
Students must give one seminar in the field of their research. In addition, full time students must participate in all seminars given in the department, and part time students must attend, during their studies, the same number of seminars that are normally given during the minimum residence requirement for full time students. The course in evaluated on a pass/fail basis. No substitution is permitted.
PHYS 790 Master’s Research and Thesis (33 credits)
POLI 801 Advanced Seminar in Comparative Politics (3 credits)
This course is a survey of the field of comparative politics at an advanced level. It examines major theories, concepts and methods of comparative political analysis.
POLI 802 Advanced Seminar in International Politics (3 credits)
This course is a survey of core concepts of international politics at an advanced level. It examines major theoretical perspectives and their application to historical and contemporary international issues.
POLI 803 Advanced Seminar in Canadian and Québec Politics (3 credits)
This course is a survey of the field at an advanced level. It presents a discussion of contemporary issues and controversies in Canadian and Québec politics.
POLI 804 Advanced Seminar in Political Theory (3 credits)
This course is a survey of leading research in political theory and political philosophy, including the history of political thought, normative political theory and contemporary political thought.
POLI 805 Advanced Seminar in Public Policy and Public Administration (3 credits)
This course surveys several theoretical models and paradigms of public policy and public administration. It examines critically the intellectual and ideological traditions of policy analysis.
POLI 844 Research Design (3 credits)
This course explores differing research philosophies, the principles of research design and research strategies. It also considers philosophical critiques of different approaches and practical aspects of conducting research.
Elective Courses
POLI 811 Special Topics in Comparative Politics (3 credits)
Topics vary from year to year.
POLI 812 Special Topics in International Politics (3 credits)
Topics vary from year to year.
POLI 813 Special Topics in Canadian and Québec Politics (3 credits)
Topics vary from year to year.
POLI 814 Special Topics in Political Theory (3 credits)
Topics vary from year to year.
POLI 815 Special Topics in Public Policy and Public Administration (3 credits)
Topics vary from year to year.
POLI 898 Directed Studies (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the PhD Committee.
This special reading course is designed to explore topics and themes relevant to a student’s doctoral research.
Comprehensive Exams
POLI 885 Comprehensive Exam (6 credits)
POLI 886 Comprehensive Exam (6 credits)
Thesis
POLI 889 Thesis Proposal (3 credits)
POLI 890 Thesis (54 credits)
POLI 694 Thesis Proposal (3 credits)
POLI 696 Master’s Thesis (24 credits)
Course Descriptions
All courses listed are one-term, 3-credit courses unless otherwise indicated. Some courses are offered in French.
Political Science
POLI 600 Public Policy and the Governmental Process in Canada
The course is designed to familiarize students with the structures and processes of policy-making in Canadian government. Particular attention is given to theories of public policy, the role of key institutions and agencies in the formulation and analysis of policy, and recent organizational developments in the executive-bureaucratic arena.
POLI 601 Research Design
This course explores differing research philosophies, the principles of research design and research strategies. It also considers philosophical critiques of different approaches and practical aspects of conducting research.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 685 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 603 International Relations Theory
This course explores the major theories, approaches and contemporary debates within international relations theory. Topics include the development of realism, liberalism, constructivism and critical approaches. Major aspects of international relations theory, such as security, political economy, and international organization, are also explored.
POLI 604 Comparative Public Policy
This course analyses policy development in industrialized countries. It focuses on various areas such as economic, education, fiscal and social policies. Moreover, this course examines contributions that address methodological issues related to comparative research.
POLI 605 Environmental Policy and Governance
Students in this seminar course conduct a theoretical and empirical survey of contemporary approaches to environmental policy development and implementation at various levels of governance, including municipal, national and international. Case studies may include toxic waste, oceans management, the impact of trade agreements, biodiversity conservation, and climate change.
POLI 606 Policy Making and the National Purpose in Canada
This course focuses upon the American challenge to Canadian independence in the economic, cultural, defence and other spheres, and examines policy initiatives taken by Canadian governments and the various proposals advanced by nationalist groups to meet this challenge.
POLI 607 Ageing and Public Policy
Substantial improvement in health, hygiene and working conditions combined with declining fertility rate is creating an important demographic shift. As a result, the number of individuals aged 65 and above is expected to double by 2031. This has multiple policy and political consequences across industrialized countries. The object of this course is to analyze this demographic shift from a comparative perspective.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 681 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 608 Globalization and Regional Integration
A study of the long range historical tendencies towards large and complex interdependent organizations in the post industrial world. These trends juxtapose the regional confederation of the European community as well as the rising trade blocs of North America and the Pacific, with the development of a single political economic and cultural super-system of global scope.
POLI 610 Economic Policy After Keynes
This course introduces students to the controversy surrounding the economics of Keynes and the implications of his work for the current problems of unemployment and growth. Interpretations of Keynes are explored in the context of the current eclipse of Keynesianism in public policy circles.
POLI 611 Judicial Politics and Policy
This course considers the increased policy-making functions of Supreme Courts in systems that have statutory and entrenched bills of rights. By focusing on the interaction between courts and legislatures, and the increasing use of litigation strategies by interest groups, the implications of public policy in a rights context are examined.
POLI 612 Public Policy and Business Cycles
This course explores the public policy of managing the business cycle. The emphasis is on both the theoretical literature associated with modern notions of managing the economic cycle and on applied case studies. The focus is both Canadian and comparative.
POLI 613 Political Socialization: A Comparative Perspective
The course presents an overview of the central concepts and theories used in political socialization research. Students learn about the major sources of political opinions, attitudes and values. This course also investigates how political socialization is used in practice in Canadian politics and within several other sub-disciplines of political science.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 683 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 614 Political Economy of Advanced Industrial Nations
The course provides an overview of the scholarly debate and research on political economy issues considered central to an examination of the political economy of advanced countries.
POLI 615 The Politics of Citizenship in Canada
This course examines key debates in the study and practice of citizenship in Canada. It explores the different forces which are transforming our understanding of citizenship, including globalization, nationalism, welfare state reform, international migration, and multiculturalism. Topics include citizenship and social exclusion; social rights and the welfare state; and economic citizenship, employment and social identity.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under POLI 685J may not take this course for credit.
POLI 616 Theories of Foreign Policy
This course explores the major international and domestic determinants of foreign policy. Principal topics include the influence of the international system, geography, leadership, regime-type, transnationalism and non-governmental organizations on foreign policy. Rather than focusing on any particular country, the course draws upon the experiences of a variety of Western democratic states utilizing case studies of American, British, French and Canadian foreign policy to illustrate and evaluate course themes.
POLI 617 Knowledge in International Relations
This course examines the creation and use of expertise in policy-making, including questions of knowledge construction, the sway of science versus norms on decision-makers, and the impact of bureaucratic processes on the quality of policy. Alternative conceptions of knowledge and its effects on decision-making from political science, sociology, economics, and psychology are applied to issues including national security, environmental politics and economics.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 687 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 618 Canadian Public Administration
Discussion is directed towards an understanding of public administration in the Canadian federal setting. Some of the main problems of public administration are related to important changes which have taken place over the last twenty years and which are continuing to take place.
POLI 619 International Peacekeeping
This course is a seminar on the theory and practice of multinational peace and stability operations. The course covers theoretical perspectives on peace operations; the origins and evolution of peace operations, with particular focus on the expansion and transformation of peace operations since the end of the Cold War; the organizational and international politics of peace operations; causes of peace operations’ success and failure; problems of managing and coordinating actors involved in peace operations; and prospects for organizational learning and reform. The course examines specific cases of peacekeeping, peacebuilding and peace enforcement.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 687 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 621 Political Leadership and Decision Making
This course considers the ways political actors attempt policy and institutional changes through an examination of leadership skills and decision making styles. It considers the philosophical treatments by Plato and Machiavelli and the relationship between morality and leadership by analyzing modern leadership within a constrained constitutional context.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under POLI 687M may not take this course for credit.
POLI 622 Comparative Public Administration
A comparative study of the public administration systems in various western countries with emphasis on a comparison vis-à-vis the Canadian federal system.
POLI 623 Ethics, Morality and Justice
This course focuses on the essential political concepts of ethics, justice and morality which underlie and motivate almost all political activity. The course explores both ancient and contemporary perspectives on the meaning of these concepts and examines the problems and theoretical challenges that arise when a definitive notion of justice is used to assess or generate public policy.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 685 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 624 Public Administration of Intergovernmental Affairs
This course deals with intergovernmental affairs that have become a significant part of the policy process in many countries. An analysis of power relations in the federal state, both in institutional and societal terms, will be a primary focus of this course. The Canadian case will serve as the main area of inquiry.
POLI 625 Policy Discourse of Biotechnology
This course examines the philosophical, political, and theoretical counsel to policymakers and broader public discourse surrounding the development and implementation of new laws and regulations pertaining to issues in advanced biotechnology, such as cloning, stem cell research, and psychopharmacology.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 685 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 626 Seminar in Comparative Politics
This course is a survey of the field of comparative politics. It examines major theories, concepts and methods of comparative political analysis.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 681 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 628 Ethics and Values in Public Policy Making
This course provokes critical thinking on value judgements underlying policy-making and familiarizes students with practical measures available for promoting integrity in public institutions. Students examine the principles underlying ethical standards, various professional codes of ethics, issues such as potential conflicts between personal convictions and public duties, and the ethical responsibility of public officials and civil servants in democratic societies.
POLI 629 Critical Perspectives in Development
This course examines key debates surrounding the concept and the politics of development in the ‘less developed’ world with a particular emphasis on institutional structures, such as the state, the market and non-governmental organizations, through which development has been pursued.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under POLI 687K may not take this course for credit.
POLI 630 0rganization Theory
This is a seminar in organization theory, an interdisciplinary field concerned with the sources, determinants, functions, and effects of complex organizations. The course focuses on political organizations and the political effects of organizations by reviewing the historical development of organization theory and considering how current debates help us understand the nature and functions of organizations in the twenty-first century. Topics include the nature and sources of formal organizations; organizational structure; organizational decision-making; organizational culture; organizational reliability and failure; and the interaction between organizations and their environments.
POLI 631 Political Texts
The course is an intensive study of a text by a major author such as Plato, Machiavelli, Hobbes, or Nietzsche. Students systematically explore the issues and problems raised by the text and the interpretive traditions that follow from it.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 685 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 632 Seminar in Political Theory
This course is a survey of leading research in and approaches to political theory and political philosophy, including the history of political thought, normative political theory and contemporary political thought.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 685 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 634 Policy Analysis and Program Evaluation
This course focuses upon methods of assessing consequences of public policies. The main purpose of the course is to allow students to survey evaluation research in political science and to present research designs that will enable them to make plausible assumptions about the outcome of governmental programs in the absence of experimental control.
POLI 635 Biotechnology, Agriculture and Food Policy
The purpose of this course is to explore the ethical and policy dilemmas that rapid scientific and technological advances in biotechnology pose for issues of agriculture and food security. The course focuses on Canadian policy within a comparative perspective and examines alternative policy responses, such as found in the US, EU and developing countries.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 685 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 636 Theories of Public Policy and Public Administration
The course explores the diverse intellectual and ideological origins of Public Administration and Public Policy. The focus is on the comparative and critical analysis of the theoretical models under study. Students are encouraged to think analytically and to apply theoretical frameworks to their own empirical enquiries.
POLI 637 Democracy and Regime Change
This seminar examines the various definitions and understandings of democratic and authoritarian regimes and the principal moments of regime change (breakdown, transition, post-transition, and consolidation). It focuses on institution-building, the actors involved in the process of regime change and the political economy of transitions.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under POLI 687B may not take this course for credit.
POLI 638 Seminar in Canadian and Quebec Politics
This course is a survey of the field at an advanced level. It presents a discussion of contemporary issues and controversies in Canadian and Quebec Politics.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 683 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 643 Rational and Public Choice
This course deals with understanding the micro-analytical foundations of individual and group behaviour in political life. It introduces students to the main concepts, theorems and their applications in positive analytical politics including game theory, spatial modeling and institutional analysis.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under POLI 687C may not take this course for credit.
POLI 644 Research Methods
This course introduces students to the logic and methodology of Political Science research and public policy analysis.
POLI 645 Indigenous Peoples and the State
This course examines the political and administrative context in which Indigenous Peoples and the state coexist as well as the tensions between European and Indigenous modes of governance. It focuses on the evolution of institutions and policies regulating this relationship, and the governance strategies developed consistent with Indigenous traditions. The Canadian case serves as the focus but other countries may be considered.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under POLI 683M may not take this course for credit.
POLI 646 History of Thought in Political Economy
This course presents a survey of the major ideas which have shaped the various approaches to political economy from the classical theorists to twentieth century thinkers. The historical and contemporary influence of these ideas on public policy is evaluated.
POLI 647 International Human Security
An introduction to the growing literature and controversies surrounding the concept of ‘human security’ in international politics, applied specifically to the Canadian foreign policy context. Examined actors include states, non-governmental organizations, international institutions, and ‘civil society’.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under POLI 687O may not take this course for credit.
POLI 648 Feminist Critiques of Public Policy
This course provides an in-depth examination of feminist and critical perspectives of public policy and administration. The course seeks to examine the ways in which social location is implicated in (and mediated by) public policy theory and practice. Specific topics may include the state of bureaucracy, state-society relations, public policy discourses, structures, processes and outcomes, and substantive issue areas, such as body politics, social and economic policy, and the labour market.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 683 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 649 Gender and Global Politics
This seminar focuses on the intersection of the global and the local through different methodological and theoretical approaches to the study of gender. Drawing from texts from the fields of comparative politics, international relations and sociology, the course exposes class participants to different scholarly treatments of gender and politics especially as these treatments have evolved in a post-Cold War era of increasing globalization.
POLI 652 Science, Technology and Power
This course introduces students to the growing field of science policy analysis. It provides an overview of the theoretical approaches and analytical tools used in the area and critically discusses various policy mechanisms now in place as well as current and emerging issues.
POLI 654 Concepts of the State
This course examines several of the most significant attempts made by modern political thinkers to answer the question, “What is the modern state?” It addresses both the historical emergence of the modern state and the various ways that this emergence has been theorized. Special emphasis is placed on the differences and interconnections between historical, theoretical, and practical questions.
POLI 657 Nationalism and Ethnicity
This seminar discusses the nature, dynamics and consequences of nationalism. The emphasis is placed on presenting and discussing various theoretical understandings of identity and nationalist mobilization. It examines conceptual issues relating to the study of nationalism, namely the nature, origins and characterizations of nations and nationalism and the strategies for regulation of nationalist conflict.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under POLI 687H may not take this course for credit.
POLI 658 Authors of the Political Imagination
This course examines a broad range of literary and non-literary genres for their potential to inform and redirect the political imagination. The seminar adopts a broadly comparative perspective on literature, culture, politics and individual motivation.
POLI 659 International Organizations
This course explores the role of international organizations, institutions and regimes in world politics. The course covers intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations as well as informal institutional arrangements. It surveys theoretical debates regarding the origins, dynamics, and significance of international organizations, and examines their role in areas such as international security, international political economy, and regional integration. The course also considers debates over democratic accountability within international organizations and the efficacy of global governance.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 687 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 662 International Political Economy
This course covers theories from macroeconomics and international relations and their application to major historical and contemporary events in the evolution of the global political economy. Topics include international trade and finance, economic development,regional integration and globalization, North-South relations, the emergence of multinational corporations, and international organizations such as the World Bank, IMF, WTO, OECD, and UNCTAD.
POLI 681 Special Topics in Comparative Politics
POLI 683 Special Topics in Public Policy and Administration
POLI 684 Special Topics in Canadian and Quebec Politics
POLI 685 Special Topics in Political Theory
POLI 687 Special Topics in International Politics
POLI 694 Thesis Proposal (3 credits)
This course is a directed study involving a comprehensive understanding of the literature in the area of research directly relevant to the thesis topic under the direction of a faculty supervisor. The written assignments involve a comprehensive literature review, annotated bibliography and research design that culminate in a thesis proposal presented in an oral defence before the thesis supervisor and two faculty members in the graduate program.
POLI 695 Directed Studies
Independent study in the area of concentration.
POLI 696 Master’s Thesis (24 credits)
Students are required to demonstrate their ability to carry out original, independent research. The thesis, which is researched and written under the direction of a supervisor and thesis committee, is defended before the student’s thesis committee.
Cognate Courses
Students may enrol in cognate courses in the John Molson School of Business and in the Departments of Communication Studies, Economics, Education, and Sociology and Anthropology in the Faculty of Arts and Science. Permission of the Graduate Program Directors of both the Master of/Magisteriate in Arts (Public Policy and Public Administration) and the second department is required.
POLI 601 Research Design (3 credits)
POLI 691 Extended Research Essay (12 credits)
POLI 693 Internship with Research Paper (21 credits)
Course Descriptions
All courses listed are one-term, 3-credit courses unless otherwise indicated. Some courses are offered in French.
Political Science
POLI 600 Public Policy and the Governmental Process in Canada
The course is designed to familiarize students with the structures and processes of policy-making in Canadian government. Particular attention is given to theories of public policy, the role of key institutions and agencies in the formulation and analysis of policy, and recent organizational developments in the executive-bureaucratic arena.
POLI 601 Research Design
This course explores differing research philosophies, the principles of research design and research strategies. It also considers philosophical critiques of different approaches and practical aspects of conducting research.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 685 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 603 International Relations Theory
This course explores the major theories, approaches and contemporary debates within international relations theory. Topics include the development of realism, liberalism, constructivism and critical approaches. Major aspects of international relations theory, such as security, political economy, and international organization, are also explored.
POLI 604 Comparative Public Policy
This course analyses policy development in industrialized countries. It focuses on various areas such as economic, education, fiscal and social policies. Moreover, this course examines contributions that address methodological issues related to comparative research.
POLI 605 Environmental Policy and Governance
Students in this seminar course conduct a theoretical and empirical survey of contemporary approaches to environmental policy development and implementation at various levels of governance, including municipal, national and international. Case studies may include toxic waste, oceans management, the impact of trade agreements, biodiversity conservation, and climate change.
POLI 606 Policy Making and the National Purpose in Canada
This course focuses upon the American challenge to Canadian independence in the economic, cultural, defence and other spheres, and examines policy initiatives taken by Canadian governments and the various proposals advanced by nationalist groups to meet this challenge.
POLI 607 Ageing and Public Policy
Substantial improvement in health, hygiene and working conditions combined with declining fertility rate is creating an important demographic shift. As a result, the number of individuals aged 65 and above is expected to double by 2031. This has multiple policy and political consequences across industrialized countries. The object of this course is to analyze this demographic shift from a comparative perspective.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 681 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 608 Globalization and Regional Integration
A study of the long range historical tendencies towards large and complex interdependent organizations in the post industrial world. These trends juxtapose the regional confederation of the European community as well as the rising trade blocs of North America and the Pacific, with the development of a single political economic and cultural super-system of global scope.
POLI 610 Economic Policy After Keynes
This course introduces students to the controversy surrounding the economics of Keynes and the implications of his work for the current problems of unemployment and growth. Interpretations of Keynes are explored in the context of the current eclipse of Keynesianism in public policy circles.
POLI 611 Judicial Politics and Policy
This course considers the increased policy-making functions of Supreme Courts in systems that have statutory and entrenched bills of rights. By focusing on the interaction between courts and legislatures, and the increasing use of litigation strategies by interest groups, the implications of public policy in a rights context are examined.
POLI 612 Public Policy and Business Cycles
This course explores the public policy of managing the business cycle. The emphasis is on both the theoretical literature associated with modern notions of managing the economic cycle and on applied case studies. The focus is both Canadian and comparative.
POLI 613 Political Socialization: A Comparative Perspective
The course presents an overview of the central concepts and theories used in political socialization research. Students learn about the major sources of political opinions, attitudes and values. This course also investigates how political socialization is used in practice in Canadian politics and within several other sub-disciplines of political science.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 683 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 614 Political Economy of Advanced Industrial Nations
The course provides an overview of the scholarly debate and research on political economy issues considered central to an examination of the political economy of advanced countries.
POLI 615 The Politics of Citizenship in Canada
This course examines key debates in the study and practice of citizenship in Canada. It explores the different forces which are transforming our understanding of citizenship, including globalization, nationalism, welfare state reform, international migration, and multiculturalism. Topics include citizenship and social exclusion; social rights and the welfare state; and economic citizenship, employment and social identity.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under POLI 685J may not take this course for credit.
POLI 616 Theories of Foreign Policy
This course explores the major international and domestic determinants of foreign policy. Principal topics include the influence of the international system, geography, leadership, regime-type, transnationalism and non-governmental organizations on foreign policy. Rather than focusing on any particular country, the course draws upon the experiences of a variety of Western democratic states utilizing case studies of American, British, French and Canadian foreign policy to illustrate and evaluate course themes.
POLI 617 Knowledge in International Relations
This course examines the creation and use of expertise in policy-making, including questions of knowledge construction, the sway of science versus norms on decision-makers, and the impact of bureaucratic processes on the quality of policy. Alternative conceptions of knowledge and its effects on decision-making from political science, sociology, economics, and psychology are applied to issues including national security, environmental politics and economics.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 687 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 618 Canadian Public Administration
Discussion is directed towards an understanding of public administration in the Canadian federal setting. Some of the main problems of public administration are related to important changes which have taken place over the last twenty years and which are continuing to take place.
POLI 619 International Peacekeeping
This course is a seminar on the theory and practice of multinational peace and stability operations. The course covers theoretical perspectives on peace operations; the origins and evolution of peace operations, with particular focus on the expansion and transformation of peace operations since the end of the Cold War; the organizational and international politics of peace operations; causes of peace operations’ success and failure; problems of managing and coordinating actors involved in peace operations; and prospects for organizational learning and reform. The course examines specific cases of peacekeeping, peacebuilding and peace enforcement.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 687 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 621 Political Leadership and Decision Making
This course considers the ways political actors attempt policy and institutional changes through an examination of leadership skills and decision making styles. It considers the philosophical treatments by Plato and Machiavelli and the relationship between morality and leadership by analyzing modern leadership within a constrained constitutional context.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under POLI 687M may not take this course for credit.
POLI 622 Comparative Public Administration
A comparative study of the public administration systems in various western countries with emphasis on a comparison vis-à-vis the Canadian federal system.
POLI 623 Ethics, Morality and Justice
This course focuses on the essential political concepts of ethics, justice and morality which underlie and motivate almost all political activity. The course explores both ancient and contemporary perspectives on the meaning of these concepts and examines the problems and theoretical challenges that arise when a definitive notion of justice is used to assess or generate public policy.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 685 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 624 Public Administration of Intergovernmental Affairs
This course deals with intergovernmental affairs that have become a significant part of the policy process in many countries. An analysis of power relations in the federal state, both in institutional and societal terms, will be a primary focus of this course. The Canadian case will serve as the main area of inquiry.
POLI 625 Policy Discourse of Biotechnology
This course examines the philosophical, political, and theoretical counsel to policymakers and broader public discourse surrounding the development and implementation of new laws and regulations pertaining to issues in advanced biotechnology, such as cloning, stem cell research, and psychopharmacology.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 685 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 626 Seminar in Comparative Politics
This course is a survey of the field of comparative politics. It examines major theories, concepts and methods of comparative political analysis.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 681 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 628 Ethics and Values in Public Policy Making
This course provokes critical thinking on value judgements underlying policy-making and familiarizes students with practical measures available for promoting integrity in public institutions. Students examine the principles underlying ethical standards, various professional codes of ethics, issues such as potential conflicts between personal convictions and public duties, and the ethical responsibility of public officials and civil servants in democratic societies.
POLI 629 Critical Perspectives in Development
This course examines key debates surrounding the concept and the politics of development in the ‘less developed’ world with a particular emphasis on institutional structures, such as the state, the market and non-governmental organizations, through which development has been pursued.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under POLI 687K may not take this course for credit.
POLI 630 0rganization Theory
This is a seminar in organization theory, an interdisciplinary field concerned with the sources, determinants, functions, and effects of complex organizations. The course focuses on political organizations and the political effects of organizations by reviewing the historical development of organization theory and considering how current debates help us understand the nature and functions of organizations in the twenty-first century. Topics include the nature and sources of formal organizations; organizational structure; organizational decision-making; organizational culture; organizational reliability and failure; and the interaction between organizations and their environments.
POLI 631 Political Texts
The course is an intensive study of a text by a major author such as Plato, Machiavelli, Hobbes, or Nietzsche. Students systematically explore the issues and problems raised by the text and the interpretive traditions that follow from it.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 685 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 632 Seminar in Political Theory
This course is a survey of leading research in and approaches to political theory and political philosophy, including the history of political thought, normative political theory and contemporary political thought.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 685 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 634 Policy Analysis and Program Evaluation
This course focuses upon methods of assessing consequences of public policies. The main purpose of the course is to allow students to survey evaluation research in political science and to present research designs that will enable them to make plausible assumptions about the outcome of governmental programs in the absence of experimental control.
POLI 635 Biotechnology, Agriculture and Food Policy
The purpose of this course is to explore the ethical and policy dilemmas that rapid scientific and technological advances in biotechnology pose for issues of agriculture and food security. The course focuses on Canadian policy within a comparative perspective and examines alternative policy responses, such as found in the US, EU and developing countries.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 685 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 636 Theories of Public Policy and Public Administration
The course explores the diverse intellectual and ideological origins of Public Administration and Public Policy. The focus is on the comparative and critical analysis of the theoretical models under study. Students are encouraged to think analytically and to apply theoretical frameworks to their own empirical enquiries.
POLI 637 Democracy and Regime Change
This seminar examines the various definitions and understandings of democratic and authoritarian regimes and the principal moments of regime change (breakdown, transition, post-transition, and consolidation). It focuses on institution-building, the actors involved in the process of regime change and the political economy of transitions.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under POLI 687B may not take this course for credit.
POLI 638 Seminar in Canadian and Quebec Politics
This course is a survey of the field at an advanced level. It presents a discussion of contemporary issues and controversies in Canadian and Quebec Politics.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 683 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 643 Rational and Public Choice
This course deals with understanding the micro-analytical foundations of individual and group behaviour in political life. It introduces students to the main concepts, theorems and their applications in positive analytical politics including game theory, spatial modeling and institutional analysis.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under POLI 687C may not take this course for credit.
POLI 644 Research Methods
This course introduces students to the logic and methodology of Political Science research and public policy analysis.
POLI 645 Indigenous Peoples and the State
This course examines the political and administrative context in which Indigenous Peoples and the state coexist as well as the tensions between European and Indigenous modes of governance. It focuses on the evolution of institutions and policies regulating this relationship, and the governance strategies developed consistent with Indigenous traditions. The Canadian case serves as the focus but other countries may be considered.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under POLI 683M may not take this course for credit.
POLI 646 History of Thought in Political Economy
This course presents a survey of the major ideas which have shaped the various approaches to political economy from the classical theorists to twentieth century thinkers. The historical and contemporary influence of these ideas on public policy is evaluated.
POLI 647 International Human Security
An introduction to the growing literature and controversies surrounding the concept of ‘human security’ in international politics, applied specifically to the Canadian foreign policy context. Examined actors include states, non-governmental organizations, international institutions, and ‘civil society’.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under POLI 687O may not take this course for credit.
POLI 648 Feminist Critiques of Public Policy
This course provides an in-depth examination of feminist and critical perspectives of public policy and administration. The course seeks to examine the ways in which social location is implicated in (and mediated by) public policy theory and practice. Specific topics may include the state of bureaucracy, state-society relations, public policy discourses, structures, processes and outcomes, and substantive issue areas, such as body politics, social and economic policy, and the labour market.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 683 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 649 Gender and Global Politics
This seminar focuses on the intersection of the global and the local through different methodological and theoretical approaches to the study of gender. Drawing from texts from the fields of comparative politics, international relations and sociology, the course exposes class participants to different scholarly treatments of gender and politics especially as these treatments have evolved in a post-Cold War era of increasing globalization.
POLI 652 Science, Technology and Power
This course introduces students to the growing field of science policy analysis. It provides an overview of the theoretical approaches and analytical tools used in the area and critically discusses various policy mechanisms now in place as well as current and emerging issues.
POLI 654 Concepts of the State
This course examines several of the most significant attempts made by modern political thinkers to answer the question, “What is the modern state?” It addresses both the historical emergence of the modern state and the various ways that this emergence has been theorized. Special emphasis is placed on the differences and interconnections between historical, theoretical, and practical questions.
POLI 657 Nationalism and Ethnicity
This seminar discusses the nature, dynamics and consequences of nationalism. The emphasis is placed on presenting and discussing various theoretical understandings of identity and nationalist mobilization. It examines conceptual issues relating to the study of nationalism, namely the nature, origins and characterizations of nations and nationalism and the strategies for regulation of nationalist conflict.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under POLI 687H may not take this course for credit.
POLI 658 Authors of the Political Imagination
This course examines a broad range of literary and non-literary genres for their potential to inform and redirect the political imagination. The seminar adopts a broadly comparative perspective on literature, culture, politics and individual motivation.
POLI 659 International Organizations
This course explores the role of international organizations, institutions and regimes in world politics. The course covers intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations as well as informal institutional arrangements. It surveys theoretical debates regarding the origins, dynamics, and significance of international organizations, and examines their role in areas such as international security, international political economy, and regional integration. The course also considers debates over democratic accountability within international organizations and the efficacy of global governance.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a POLI 687 number may not take this course for credit.
POLI 662 International Political Economy
This course covers theories from macroeconomics and international relations and their application to major historical and contemporary events in the evolution of the global political economy. Topics include international trade and finance, economic development,regional integration and globalization, North-South relations, the emergence of multinational corporations, and international organizations such as the World Bank, IMF, WTO, OECD, and UNCTAD.
POLI 681 Special Topics in Comparative Politics
POLI 683 Special Topics in Public Policy and Administration
POLI 684 Special Topics in Canadian and Quebec Politics
POLI 685 Special Topics in Political Theory
POLI 687 Special Topics in International Politics
POLI 691 Extended Research Essay (12 credits)
The Extended Research Essay is a directed study supervised by a faculty member with whom a student completed a course in their area of concentration. Requiring additional research, this degree requirement builds on a term paper submitted at the graduate level in a concentration course and is considered to be a significant revision and extension of that paper, with an extensive bibliography.
POLI 693 Internship with Research Paper (21 credits)
The Internship is a four-month job placement in either the public or private sector. Under the direction of a faculty supervisor, the student prepares an original, theoretical work that comprises a series of policy recommendations that contribute to the policy process in Canada.
POLI 695 Directed Studies
Independent study in the area of concentration.
Cognate Courses
Students may enrol in cognate courses in the John Molson School of Business and in the Departments of Communication Studies, Economics, Education, and Sociology and Anthropology in the Faculty of Arts and Science. Permission of the Graduate Program Directors of both the Master of/Magisteriate in Arts (Public Policy and Public Administration) and the second department is required.
PSYC 844, 845, 846 or 847 (3 to12 credits). Each 3-credit seminar may be taken up to 4 times as an elective option provided the topic differs.
PSYC 700, 701, 714, 716, 721, 722, 724, 725, 726,727, 734, 850, or 851 (6-15 credits). Special Topics seminars PSYC 721, 722, 724, 725, 726, and 727 may be taken multiple times as an elective option provided that the course content has changed.
Research and Clinical Training Option (18 credits):
In addition to the core courses, students select from the following sets of courses for a maximum of 18 credits:
PSYC 823, 824, or 825 (3 credits); PSYC 834 (3 credits); PSYC 835, 836, or 837 (3 credits); PSYC 841, 842, or 843 (3 credits); PSYC 838, 839, or 840 (3 credits); and PSYC 885 (3 credits).
At least one adult and one child client must be seen in the required practicum courses ((APC Practicum II or III, Extramural Practicum I). All students following the Research and Clinical Training Option are expected to attend case conferences at the Applied Psychology Centre training clinic.
Academic Regulations
Academic Standing. Please refer to the Academic Standing section of the Calendar for a detailed review of the Academic Regulations.
Time Limit. Please refer to the Academic Regulation page for further details regarding the Time Limit requirements. In the case of the Diploma in Clinical Psychology, the time limit is 9 terms (3 years) for full-time students; for part-time students the time limit is 15 terms (5 years).
Graduation Requirement. In order to graduate, students must have a cumulative GPA of at least 3.00.
Courses
The following are 3-credit courses unless otherwise indicated.
PSYC 700 Psychopathology
Prerequisite: Undergraduate course in behaviour disorders or equivalent.
This seminar deals with historical and current approaches to the study of behaviour disorders and problems of life adjustment in both adults and children, including critical evaluation of empirical findings in selected areas. Classification systems, including the current revision of the APA Diagnostic and Statistical Manual, are critically reviewed. Students with credit for PSYC 660 or 860 may not take this course for credit.
PSYC 701 Models of Assessment I
Prerequisite: PSYC 700; Co-requisite: PSYC 706 or permission of the Director of Clinical Training.
Focusing on cognitive and ability testing of children and adults, this course stresses the conceptual bases of ability testing, research results and their implications for test interpretation, and strengths and limitations of current test batteries for children and adults. Specific course content includes: a) measurement theory, including issues of test construction, reliability, validity, and evaluation; b) appropriate use and interpretation of specific cognitive assessment batteries (e.g. the Wechsler and Stanford-Binet scales for children and adults); and c) special assessment issues, including the testing of minorities and assessment-related ethical problems. A practicum in assessment techniques (PSYC 706) is typically taken in conjunction with this course.
PSYC 714 Central Topics in Psychology (6 credits)
This general seminar deals with basic theoretical and research issues in Psychology. Topics are drawn from a wide range of areas in Psychology including perceptual and cognitive processes, learning, motivation, and psycho-pathology. Issues are considered with respect to developmental, physiological and social approaches. Students who have received credit for PSYC 602 may not take this course for credit.
PSYC 716 Advanced Human Development
This seminar on theory and research focuses on human development and developmental processes. Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided that the course content has changed. Change in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number.
PSYC 721 Special Topics Seminar
This seminar provides an advanced treatment of specialized research literature in an integrative or selected area of psychology outside the department’s major areas of specialization. It may be offered as a seminar, tutorial or directed reading course, or in any other format, subject to approval of the program director. Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course multiple times provided that the course content has changed.
PSYC 722 Focused Topic Seminar (1.5 credits)
This seminar provides an advanced treatment of specialized research literature in a selected area of psychology. It may be offered as a seminar, tutorial or directed reading course, or in any other format, subject to approval of the program director. Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course multiple times provided that the course content has changed.
PSYC 724 Special Topics in Clinical and Health Psychology
This course provides an advanced treatment of specialized research literature in an area of clinical and/or health psychology. It may be offered as a seminar, tutorial or directed reading course, or in any other format, subject to approval of the program director. Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course multiple times provided that the course content has changed.
PSYC 725 Special Topics in Cognitive Science
This course provides an advanced treatment of specialized research literature in an area of cognitive science. It may be offered as a seminar, tutorial or directed reading course, or in any other format, subject to approval of the program director. Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course multiple times provided that the course content has changed.
PSYC 726 Special Topics in Human Development
This course provides an advanced treatment of specialized research literature in an area of human development and developmental processes. It may be offered as a seminar, tutorial or directed reading course, or in any other format, subject to approval of the program director. Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course multiple times provided that the course content has changed.
PSYC 727 Special Topics in Behavioural Neuroscience
This course provides an advanced treatment of specialized research literature in an area of behavioural neuroscience. It may be offered as a seminar, tutorial or directed reading course, or in any other format, subject to approval of the program director. Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course multiple times provided that the course content has changed.
PSYC 734 Multivariate Statistics
Prerequisite: PSYC 601.
Building upon material presented in PSYC 601, this course covers latent variable analyses and multivariate procedures, including factor analysis, structural equation modelling, multiple group models, and multilevel modelling.
PSYC 801 Research Seminar I
A seminar attended by all doctoral students in which specific research proposals and related theoretical issues and methodological problems are presented for discussion by students and participating faculty.
PSYC 802 Research Seminar II
A continuation of PSYC 801.
PSYC 823 APC Practicum III: General
Prerequisite: PSYC 708 (or 709 or 710), 711 (or 712 or 713). Prerequisite or Co-requisite: PSYC 834, 835 (or 836 or 837), and permission of the Director of Clinical Training.
Advanced students are expected to begin to define clinical interests and treatment methods consonant with their career goals. They receive the appropriate clinical experience and supervision in this practicum (e.g., working with children, adolescents, adults, working with clients who present particular types of problems).
PSYC 824 APC Practicum III: Adult
Prerequisite: PSYC 708 (or 709 or 710), 711 (or 712 or 713). Prerequisite or Co-requisite: PSYC 834, 835 (or 836 or 837), and permission of the Director of Clinical Training.
Advanced students are expected to begin to define clinical interests and treatment methods consonant with their career goals. They receive the appropriate clinical experience and supervision in this practicum working with adult clients, e.g. working with a particular orientation and/or with particular types of problems.
PSYC 825 APC Practicum III: Child
Prerequisite: PSYC 708 (or 709 or 710), 711 (or 712 or 713). Prerequisite or Co-requisite: PSYC 834, 835 (or 836 or 837), and permission of the Director of Clinical Training.
Advanced students are expected to begin to define clinical interests and treatment methods consonant with their career goals. They receive the appropriate clinical experience and supervision in this practicum working with child clients and families, e.g. working with a particular orientation and/or with particular types of problems.
PSYC 826 APC Practicum IV: General
Prerequisite: PSYC 823 (or 824 or 825) and permission of the Director of Clinical Training.
This course is a specialized practicum for advanced students involving clinical experience under supervision.
PSYC 827 APC Practicum IV: Adult
Prerequisite: PSYC 823 (or 824 or 825) and permission of the Director of Clinical Training.
This course is a specialized practicum for advanced students involving clinical experience with adult clients under supervision.
PSYC 828 APC Practicum IV: Child
Prerequisite: PSYC 823 (or 824 or 825) and permission of the Director of Clinical Training.
This course is a specialized practicum for advanced students involving clinical experience with child clients under supervision.
PSYC 834 Advanced Clinical Seminar I
Prerequisite: PSYC 711 (or 712 or 713), 708 (or 709 or 710), and permission of Director of Clinical Training.
This seminar provides an advanced treatment of issues in current psychological theory and research that are relevant to clinical practice, e.g., causal models and their assumptions, legal and ethical issues, classification by state, trait, and situational context; brain-behaviour relations. The aims are to foster in students a) regular review of clinically relevant literature; b) a critical perspective regarding current clinical practices; and c) guidelines and criteria for optimal assessment and treatment decisions tailored to the needs of clients.
PSYC 835 Advanced Clinical Seminar II: Adult
Prerequisite: PSYC 834.
The seminar provides an advanced analysis of issues in the assessment and treatment of behaviour disorders in adulthood. Prototype cases are presented for illustrative discussion of particular clinical issues, e.g. indicators of risk for suicide, homicide, and psychosis; imagery and dreams in psychological treatment; stress-related physical disorders; anxiety-spectrum disorders; treatment for couples, families, and groups. Assessment and treatment approaches to particular disorders are compared with reference to etiological assumptions and levels of inference.
PSYC 836 Advanced Clinical Seminar II: Child
Prerequisite: PSYC 834.
The seminar provides an advanced analysis of issues in the assessment and treatment of behaviour disorders in children in a developmental context. Prototype cases are presented for illustrative discussion of particular clinical issues, e.g. stress-related physical disorders; family therapy; child abuse; age-related symptom expression and variability; non-verbal therapies.
PSYC 837 Advanced Clinical Seminar II: General
Prerequisite: PSYC 834.
This seminar is a blend of issues examined in PSYC 835 and 836 (see above).
PSYC 838 Extramural Practicum II: General
Prerequisite: PSYC 708 (or 709 or 710), 711 (or 712 or 713), and permission of the Director of Clinical Training.
This course is a senior extramural practicum, done under qualified supervision in an applied setting approved by the department’s practicum committee, e.g. hospitals, clinics, schools, community and rehabilitation centres.
PSYC 839 Extramural Practicum II: Adult
Prerequisite: PSYC 708 (or 709 or 710), 711 (or 712 or 713), and permission of the Director of Clinical Training.
This course is a senior extramural practicum with adult clients, done under qualified supervision in an applied setting approved by the department’s practicum committee, e.g. hospitals, clinics, schools, community and rehabilitation centres.
PSYC 840 Extramural Practicum II: Child
Prerequisite: PSYC 708 (or 709 or 710), 711 (or 712 or 713), and permission of the Director of Clinical Training.
This course is a senior extramural practicum with child clients done under qualified supervision in an applied setting approved by the department’s practicum committee, e.g. hospitals, clinics, schools, community and rehabilitation centres.
PSYC 841 Extramural Practicum III: General
This course is a senior extramural practicum, done under qualified supervision in an applied setting approved by the department’s practicum committee, e.g. hospitals, clinics, schools, community and rehabilitation centres.
PSYC 842 Extramural Practicum III: Adult
This course is a senior extramural practicum with adult clients, done under qualified supervision in an applied setting approved by the department’s practicum committee, e.g. hospitals, clinics, schools, community and rehabilitation centres.
PSYC 843 Extramural Practicum III: Child
This course is a senior extramural practicum with child clients, done under qualified supervision in an applied setting approved by the department’s practicum committee, e.g. hospitals, clinics, schools, community and rehabilitation centres.
PSYC 844 Clinical and Health Research Area Seminar II
This seminar provides the opportunity for faculty and students working in clinical and health psychology to present and discuss their current research.
Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course up to 4 times provided that the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. PSYC 844A, PSYC 844B.
PSYC 845 Cognitive Science Area Seminar II
This seminar provides the opportunity for faculty and students working in cognitive science to present and discuss their current research.
Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course up to 4 times provided that the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. PSYC 845A, PSYC 845B.
PSYC 846 Human Development Area Seminar II
This seminar provides the opportunity for faculty and students working on human development and developmental processes to present and discuss their current research.
Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course up to 4 times provided that the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. PSYC 846A, PSYC 846B.
PSYC 847 Behavioural Neuroscience Area Seminar II
This seminar provides the opportunity for faculty and students working in behavioural neuroscience to present and discuss their current research.
Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course up to 4 times provided that the course content has changed. Changes in content are indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. PSYC 847A, PSYC 847B.
PSYC 850 Practicum in Research Techniques (3 or 6 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the PhD Program Director.
This practicum is designed to give students the opportunity to develop their research skills by such activities as learning new experimental and technical approaches, developing instruments or computer programs to support research, developing expertise in advanced statistical methods, or other equivalent activities.
PSYC 851 Teaching of Research Techniques
Prerequisite: Permission of PhD Program Director.
This practicum is designed to train students in the teaching of research techniques. Under supervision, the student is responsible for training an apprentice in specialized experimental skills or research techniques that may include advanced statistical methods, or other equivalent activities. Prior to beginning the work, students submit a detailed outline of the planned teaching activities to be approved by the program director.
PSYC 880 PhD Comprehensive Examination (non-credit)
PSYC 885 Predoctoral Internship
Prerequisite: PSYC 835 (or 836 or 837), 823 (824 or 825), and permission of the Director of Clinical Training.
The pre-doctoral internship consists of the equivalent of 12 months full-time employment under qualified supervision in an applied setting approved by the department’s internship committee. The internship is usually done after completion of course requirements, and after data collection and analysis, and a draft of the doctoral thesis have been completed.
PSYC 890 Research and Thesis (60 credits)
PSYC 690 Research and Thesis (30 credits)
PSYC 700 Psychopathology
Prerequisite: Undergraduate course in behaviour disorders or equivalent.
This seminar deals with historical and current approaches to the study of behaviour disorders and problems of life adjustment in both adults and children, including critical evaluation of empirical findings in selected areas. Classification systems, including the current revision of the APA Diagnostic and Statistical Manual, are critically reviewed. Students with credit for PSYC 660 or 860 may not take this course for credit.
PSYC 714 Central Topics in Psychology (6 credits)
This general seminar deals with basic theoretical and research issues in Psychology. Topics are drawn from a wide range of areas in Psychology including perceptual and cognitive processes, learning, motivation, and psycho-pathology. Issues are considered with respect to developmental, physiological and social approaches. Students who have received credit for PSYC 602 may not take this course for credit.
PSYC 716 Advanced Human Development
This seminar on theory and research focuses on human development and developmental processes. Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided that the course content has changed. Change in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number.
PSYC 721 Special Topics Seminar
This seminar provides an advanced treatment of specialized research literature in an integrative or selected area of psychology outside the department’s major areas of specialization. It may be offered as a seminar, tutorial or directed reading course, or in any other format, subject to approval of the program director. Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course multiple times provided that the course content has changed.
PSYC 722 Focused Topic Seminar (1.5 credits)
This seminar provides an advanced treatment of specialized research literature in a selected area of psychology. It may be offered as a seminar, tutorial or directed reading course, or in any other format, subject to approval of the program director. Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course multiple times provided that the course content has changed.
PSYC 724 Special Topics in Clinical and Health Psychology
This course provides an advanced treatment of specialized research literature in an area of clinical and/or health psychology. It may be offered as a seminar, tutorial or directed reading course, or in any other format, subject to approval of the program director. Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course multiple times provided that the course content has changed.
PSYC 725 Special Topics in Cognitive Science
This course provides an advanced treatment of specialized research literature in an area of cognitive science. It may be offered as a seminar, tutorial or directed reading course, or in any other format, subject to approval of the program director. Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course multiple times provided that the course content has changed.
PSYC 726 Special Topics in Human Development
This course provides an advanced treatment of specialized research literature in an area of human development and developmental processes. It may be offered as a seminar, tutorial or directed reading course, or in any other format, subject to approval of the program director. Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course multiple times provided that the course content has changed.
PSYC 727 Special Topics in Behavioural Neuroscience
This course provides an advanced treatment of specialized research literature in an area of behavioural neuroscience. It may be offered as a seminar, tutorial or directed reading course, or in any other format, subject to approval of the program director. Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may register for this course multiple times provided that the course content has changed.
PSYC 734 Multivariate Statistics
Prerequisite: PSYC 601.
Building upon material presented in PSYC 601, this course covers latent variable analyses and multivariate procedures, including factor analysis, structural equation modelling, multiple group models, and multilevel modelling.
RELI 6040 Guided Research Project Proposal (Judaic Studies) (3 credits)
The proposal for the guided research project (GRP) is 2,500-3,000 words in length. The GRP proposal outlines the nature of the student’s project, whether a research paper, artistic or technical project. It outlines how the project is connected to a student’s coursework, career or academic goals and the timeframe in which they complete the project. It includes a bibliography of at least ten academic sources, and any primary materials (such as editions of critical texts), which the students use.
RELI 6041 Guided Research Project (Judaic Studies) (24 credits)
The guided research project (GRP) is 11,000-12,500 words (about 40-50 pages) in length, exclusive of footnotes and bibliography. The GRP is usually undertaken in a student’s third or fourth semester (after the completion of coursework). This research paper develops themes or subjects with which the student engaged in his or her coursework. Students in the MA in Judaic Studies write on an aspect of Jewish history or culture.
Thesis Option
RELI 6050 Thesis Proposal (Judaic Studies) (3 credits)
The proposal for the thesis is 2,500-3,000 words in length. A thesis proposal outlines the student’s proposed research project, locates their research in relation to existing scholarship, clarifies their methodology and research questions, and includes a bibliography of at least ten academic sources, and any primary materials (such as editions of critical texts), which the students use.
RELI 6051 Thesis (Judaic Studies) (30 credits)
The thesis is 18,000-24,000 words (about 60-80 pages) in length, exclusive of footnotes and bibliography. The thesis provides an opportunity for the student to both demonstrate their historical and cultural knowledge and depth of understanding of a particular subject in the study of religions and cultures. Students in the MA in Judaic Studies write on an aspect of Jewish history or culture. Students also demonstrate facility with one or two methodological approaches studied in the course of their program and illustrate their capacity to apply the approaches to a particular problem or issue in religious studies. Thesis writers have the requisite language skills to undertake this more rigorous type of research, for instance, Yiddish or Hebrew.
RELI 6020 Guided Research Project Proposal (Religions and Cultures) (3 credits)
The proposal for the guided research project (GRP) is 2,500-3,000 words in length. The GRP proposal outlines the nature of the student’s project, whether a research paper, artistic or technical project. It outlines how the project is connected to a student’s coursework, career or academic goals and the timeframe in which they complete the project. It includes a bibliography of at least ten academic sources, and any primary materials (such as editions of critical texts), which the students use.
RELI 6021 Guided Research Project (Religions and Cultures) (24 credits)
The guided research project (GRP) is 11,000-12,500 words (about 40-50 pages) in length, exclusive of footnotes and bibliography. The GRP is usually undertaken in a student’s third or fourth semester (after the completion of coursework). This research paper develops themes or subjects with which a student engaged in his or her course work.
Thesis Option
RELI 6030 Thesis Proposal (Religions and Cultures) (3 credits)
The proposal for the thesis is 2,500-3,000 words in length. A thesis proposal outlines the student’s proposed research project, locates their research in relation to existing scholarship, clarifies their methodology and research questions, and includes a bibliography of at least ten academic sources, and any primary materials (such as editions of critical texts), which the students use.
RELI 6031 Thesis (Religions and Cultures) (30 credits)
The thesis is 18,000-24,000 words (about 60-80 pages) in length, exclusive of footnotes and bibliography. The thesis provides an opportunity for the student to both demonstrate their historical and cultural knowledge and depth of understanding of a particular subject in the study of religions and cultures. Students also demonstrate facility with one or two methodological approaches studied in the course of their program, and illustrate their capacity to apply them to a particular problem or issue in religious studies. Thesis writers have the requisite language skills to undertake this more rigorous type of research, for instance, Sanskrit, Yiddish, Hebrew, Arabic, or Greek.
SCPA 501 Introduction to Community Economic Development (3 credits)
This course provides an overview of CED. It traces the historical and intellectual roots of CED as well as critically situates CED in the context of theories of community, local and regional development. Students are provided with basic tools of macro-economic analysis and policy evaluation as it relates to the practice of CED. This course focuses on the institutional environment in which CED initiatives operate to identify the potential and the limitations of local, community-based development strategies. Special focus is given to the perspectives of CED arising out of the feminist movement, cultural communities, Aboriginal communities, the popular sector and other social change movements.
SCPA 502 Comparative Approaches and Models in CED (3 credits)
This course focuses on the objectives of CED by examining the various strategies and diversity of models of CED practices in Quebec, as well as many found elsewhere in Canada, the United States, in Europe and in southern hemispheric countries. The differences in organizational structures and empowerment processes, as well as their social, cultural and economic context is studied and evaluated, mainly through case studies of selected communities.
SCPA 503 Fundamental Skills for CED Practice (3 credits)
This course focuses on helping students acquire a working knowledge of the practical skills required for building community economic capacity. This includes developing tools to map the material, environmental and human resources within communities. This course assists students in designing socio-economic indicators and a framework for evaluation of CED initiatives and strategic planning. Students are encouraged to identify, as soon as possible, how the use of such skills can be incorporated into either a CED project or an internship within a CED initiative.
SCPA 504 Community Organizing and CED (3 credits)
This course focuses on helping students acquire a working knowledge of the practical skills required in community organizing and capacity building for individual and community empowerment within a CED context. The course explores the role of popular education in community mobilization and collective action, and delves into the strategies, tactics and techniques of community intervention.
SCPA 505 Social Enterprise Development and Social Entrepreneurship (3 credits)
This course provides a framework for business development within a CED perspective. Basic tools for enterprise development, including comprehensive business planning, data evaluation, financial analysis, and forecasting are to be integrated into a social and ethical framework to maintain the democratic objectives of CED. Students develop skills in evaluating a successful commercial venture within the context of these larger objectives.
Project
SCPA 510 CED Field Project - Part I (3 credits)
SCPA 510 structures the Field Project. It introduces students to tools that can be used to design and implement their projects. During this course, students begin to implement their plan with the host organization. Assignments are based on the integration of the tools with the work undertaken in the field project.
Note: This course is part of the requirement that students complete a two-semester field project in some aspect of community economic development. This project is selected and negotiated by the student with a community organization and addresses a particular challenge raised within this setting.
SCPA 511 CED Field Project - Part II (3 credits)
Prerequisite: SCPA 510.
Students continue their field project for a second term within the framework of this course. They build on the practice of the previous term and advance it to reach the objectives established with their host organization. This course aims to strengthen the student’s skills in the critical evaluation of practice. Students examine their practice and the reasons for its success, as well as examine strategies for overcoming the barriers they faced. This course offers a framework for the final written report required of students, to be both shared with their host organizations and submitted for the course.
Areas of Concentration: Elective Courses
Areas of concentration are identified according to CED practices in order to help students choose elective courses relevant to their fields of professional specialization or of personal interest. Students will have indicated their priority areas of concentration on their application for admission form.
Up to five areas of concentration are offered, resources permitting, in a given year. The areas are: financing CED initiatives; housing, land use, and urban planning from a CED perspective; communications, technology and CED; international development and CED; Aboriginal CED.
Courses corresponding to these areas of concentration are the following:
SCPA 508 Financing CED Initiatives: Part I (3 credits)
This course examines the roles which can be played by both traditional (banks) and non-traditional (community loan funds) financial institutions in supporting CED initiatives. Special emphasis is placed on exploring alternative financial CED structures. Skills are developed to understand and generate financial planning, as well as investment decisions in traditional and non-traditional enterprises.
SCPA 509 Financing CED Initiatives: Part II (3 credits)
Prerequisite: SCPA 508.
This course uses a case study approach to critically examine and evaluate existing alternative CED initiatives in Canada and the US. This may include on site visits, interviews and occasional guest lecturers.
SCPA 515 Housing and Land Use from a CED Perspective: Part I (3 credits)
This course examines the institutional, economic, political, and environmental factors which affect land policy, and the development of affordable housing. It identifies public and private financial sources and various forms of ownership models including community land trusts and housing cooperatives, among others. Among the skills developed are those related to market analysis and housing needs assessment, site selection and control, and preparing housing projects.
SCPA 516 Housing and Land Use from a CED Perspective: Part II (3 credits)
Prerequisite: SCPA 515.
This course uses a case study approach to critically examine and evaluate existing housing projects, affordable housing and land policy based on a selection of experiences in the U.S. and in Canada. This may include on site visits, interviews and occasional guest lecturers.
SCPA 522 Communications, Technology and CED: Part I (3 credits)
This course explores issues related to information management, analysis and dissemination using different vehicles available including mass media, the Internet, and other new technologies as they emerge. Basic computer literacy is required.
SCPA 523 Communications, Technology and CED: Part II (3 credits)
Prerequisite: SCPA 522.
This course equips practitioners with skills required to share and diffuse CED practices across communities that work in isolation and helps to develop the skills required for communities to use the new technologies and resources necessary for development purposes.
SCPA 529 International Development and CED: Part I (3 credits)
This course explores community-based economic development approaches in countries of the South within their socio-political and historical context. Many economic initiatives in the North have borrowed from these experiences. The course explores the advantages and disadvantages of importing and exporting development models and practices and equips the students with the skills to evaluate the appropriateness of CED models and how to adapt the models, wherever required.
SCPA 530 International Development and CED: Part II (3 credits)
Prerequisite: SCPA 529.
This course explores existing North/South networking and collaboration by identifying non-governmental organizations, community groups and social movements which are working together to develop CED strategies in their respective countries. Discussion is encouraged through class seminars and occasional guest lectures.
SCPA 536 Aboriginal CED: Part I (3 credits)
This course assists participants in exploring specific issues related to Aboriginal community economic development in particular settings (on reserve, urban, rural and northern communities), and addresses challenges common to Aboriginal CED. The course assists participants in exploring historical and contemporary relationships between Aboriginal communities and the predominant cultural and economic forces, and compares traditional Aboriginal organizing and economic practices with the new approaches being proposed by CED.
SCPA 537 Aboriginal CED: Part II (3 credits)
Prerequisite: SCPA 536.
This course uses a case study approach to evaluate one or more community economic development strategies applied within an Aboriginal community. A historical overview of this experience outlines the cultural and political context which has shaped these strategies as well as their results. CED approaches are examined in the context of this individual experience. This course may include on site visits and guest lecturers.
Open Sessions
SCPA 543 A-Z Open Sessions (1 credit each)
The themes and content of the various open sessions are determined at the beginning of each academic year. Three open sessions are offered every year (1 credit each for a total of 3 credits). Possible topics may include: feminist approaches to CED, lobbying decision-making bodies, consensus management, coalition-building, and using the internet for community development purposes - as well as topics related to current events.
SCPA 501 : Introduction au développement économique communautaire (3 crédits)
Ce cours offre une vue d’ensemble du DÉC. Il retrace l’historique et les fondements intellectuels du DÉC et situe le DÉC par rapport aux théories du développement communautaire local et régional. Le cours fournit également aux étudiant-e-s des outils de base pour l’analyse macro-économique et pour l’évaluation des politiques sociales relatives à la pratique du DÉC. Ce cours se concentre sur l’environnement institutionnel dans lequel les initiatives de DÉC opèrent afin d’identifier le potentiel et les limites des stratégies de développement axées sur les communautés locales. Une attention particulière est portée aux perspectives de DÉC émanant du mouvement féministe, des communautés culturelles, des communautés autochtones, du mouvement populaire et d’autres mouvements de changement social.
SCPA 502 : Approches comparatives et modèles de DÉC (3 crédits)
Ce cours se concentre sur les objectifs du DÉC en examinant les diverses stratégies et les différents modèles de pratique de DÉC au Québec, ainsi qu’ailleurs au Canada, aux États-Unis, en Europe et dans les pays de l’hémisphère sud. Des études de cas de communautés sélectionnées sont principalement utilisées afin d’étudier et d’évaluer les différences existant au sein des structures organisationnelles et des processus d’empowerment, ainsi que leur contexte social, culturel et économique.
SCPA 503 : Compétences de base en DÉC (3 crédits)
Ce cours aide les étudiants et étudiantes à acquérir une connaissance d’usage des compétences pratiques requises pour bâtir la capacité de prise en charge économique d’une communauté. Ceci comprend l’élaboration d’outils permettant d’inventorier les ressources matérielles, environnementales et humaines au sein d’une communauté. Ce cours aide aussi les étudiants et étudiantes à élaborer des indices socio-économiques ainsi qu’un cadre d’évaluation des initiatives de DÉC et de la planification stratégique. Les étudiant-e-s sont encouragé-e-s, le plus tôt possible, à identifier comment ils/elles pourront inclure ces compétences dans un projet de DÉC ou un stage à l’intérieur d’une initiative de DÉC.
SCPA 504 : Organisation communautaire et DÉC (3 crédits)
Ce cours permet aux étudiant-e-s d’acquérir une connaissance d’usage des compétences pratiques nécessaires pour maîtriser l’organisation communautaire et pour développer l’empowerment des individus et des communautés dans un contexte de DÉC. Ce cours explore le rôle que joue l’éducation populaire dans la mobilisation des communautés et dans l’action collective, et approfondit les tactiques, stratégies et techniques de l’intervention communautaire.
SCPA 505 : Développement d’entreprises sociales et entreprenariat social (3 crédits)
Ce cours propose un cadre de référence pour le développement d’entreprises selon une perspective de DÉC. Des outils de base pour le développement d’entreprises, incluant le développement de plans d’affaires complets, l’évaluation de données, l’analyse financière et l’élaboration de prévisions, seront intégrés dans un cadre social et éthique afin de préserver les objectifs démocratiques du DÉC. Les étudiant-e-s développent les compétences requises afin d’évaluer le succès d’une entreprise commerciale en tenant compte du contexte global de ces objectifs.
Projet
SCPA 510 : Projet en DÉC. Partie I (3 crédits)
En suivant le programme à temps plein, les participant-e-s devront, une fois les trois premiers cours principaux du trimestre d’automne complétés, entreprendre un cours de projet de deux trimestres dans un domaine du développement économique communautaire relié à leur spécialisation ou à champ d’intérêts. Ce projet peut se dérouler au sein du milieu de travail ou de bénévolat du/de la participant-e.
Le projet pratique constitue une occasion pour les participant-e-s de faire face - de manière participative - à un défi particulier qui les passionne et qui est perçu comme important par l’organisme au sein duquel le projet se déroule. Les participant-e-s devront faire appel à leurs forces, leurs expériences passées, et leurs talents, tout en tenant compte de leurs objectifs d’apprentissage. Tous les participantes et participants devront assumer la responsabilité de définir, chercher et négocier leurs projets pratiques par eux-mêmes, avec, bien sur, l’appui du programme de diplôme de 2e cycle en DÉC.
SCPA 511 : Projet DÉC. Partie II (3 crédits)
Préalable : SCPA 510.
Dans la deuxième partie du cours, les participant-e-s analyseront de façon critique leur progrès au sein de leurs projets respectifs, et rédigeront un rapport final résumant et évaluant le projet et les expériences que celui-ci les a amené-e-s à vivre. Ce projet permettra de vérifier les compétences acquises et de valider les idées et théories apprises dans une situation réelle. Des practicien-ne-s de DÉC sont invité-e-s à participer à l’évaluation des résultats du projet.
Domaines de spécialisation : cours optionnels
Les domaines de spécialisation sont identifiés selon les pratiques de DÉC de façon à aider les étudiant-e-s à choisir des cours optionnels adaptés à leurs spécialités professionnelles ou leurs intérêts personnels; le choix de domaine de spécialisation est spécifié dans la demande d’admission.
Jusqu’à cinq domaines de spécialisation sont offerts chaque année. Les domaines identifiés sont: le financement des initiatives de DÉC; le logement, l’aménagement du territoire et l’urbanisme dans une perspective de DÉC; les communications, la technologie et le DÉC; le développement international et le DÉC; le DÉC en milieu autochtone.
Les cours qui correspondent à ces domaines de spécialisation sont les suivants:
SCPA 508 : Le financement des initiatives de DÉC. Partie I (3 crédits)
Ce cours permet d’étudier les rôles que peuvent jouer les institutions financières traditionnelles (les banques) et non traditionnelles (les associations communautaires de prêt) pour soutenir les initiatives de DÉC. Une attention particulière est portée à l’étude des structures financières alternatives de DÉC. Les compétences requises afin de comprendre et d’initier la planification financière ainsi que la prise de décision quant aux investissements dans les entreprises traditionnelles et non traditionnelles sont également développées.
SCPA 509 : Le financement des initiatives de DÉC. Partie II (3 crédits)
Préalable : SCPA 508.
La seconde partie de ce cours empruntera une approche d’étude de cas pour examiner de façon critique et évaluer des initiatives originales de DÉC au Canada et aux États-Unis. Cela pourrait comprendre la visite de sites, des entrevues et des conférences occasionnelles.
SCPA 515 : Logement et aménagement du territoire dans une perspective de DÉC. Partie I (3 crédits)
Ce cours examine les facteurs institutionnels, économiques, politiques et environnementaux qui influent sur la politique d’aménagement du territoire et la création de logements à prix modique. Il décrit aussi les sources financières publiques et privées ainsi que diverses formes de propriété, y compris les fiducies foncières communautaires et les coopératives de logement. Il permet d’acquérir, entre autres, des compétences en analyse du marché, évaluation des besoins en logement, sélection et contrôle des sites, et préparation de projets domiciliaires.
SCPA 516 : Logement et aménagement du territoire dans une perspective de DÉC. Partie II (3 crédits)
Préalable : SCPA 515.
Ce cours se fonde sur des études de cas américaines et canadiennes afin d’effectuer un examen critique et une évaluation de projets domiciliaires existants, du logement à prix modique et de la politique d’aménagement du territoire. Il pourrait comprendre des visite de sites, des entrevues et des conférences occasionnelles.
SCPA 522 : Communications, technologie et DÉC. Partie I (3 crédits)
Ce cours explore les questions liées à la gestion, à l’analyse et à la diffusion de l’information par différents moyens, y compris les médias de masse, Internet, et les technologies en émergence. Les participant-e-s doivent posséder des connaissances de base en informatique.
SCPA 523 : Communications, technologie et DÉC. Partie II (3 crédits)
Préalable : SCPA 522.
Ce cours dote les praticien-ne-s des compétences nécessaires pour diffuser largement les pratiques de DÉC dans des collectivités qui travaillent souvent dans l’isolement, et pour leur transmettre les compétences dont elles ont besoin afin d’utiliser les nouvelles technologies comme instruments de développement.
SCPA 529 : Développement international et DÉC. Partie I (3 crédits)
Ce cours examine les approches communautaires de développement économique des pays du Sud dans leur contexte socio-politique et historique. De nombreuses initiatives économiques du Nord s’inspirent de ces expériences. Le cours explore aussi les avantages et les désavantages de l’importation et de l’exportation de modèles et de pratiques de développement, et permet d’acquérir les compétences nécessaires pour évaluer l’à-propos de modèles de DÉC et les adapter, au besoin.
SCPA 530 : Développement international et DÉC. Partie II (3 crédits)
Préalable : SCPA 529.
La seconde partie de ce cours explore les réseaux et la collaboration Nord-Sud en identifiant les organismes non gouvernementaux, les groupes communautaires et les mouvements sociaux qui travaillent ensemble pour formuler des stratégies de DÉC dans leur pays respectif. On encourage la discussion par des séminaires et des conférences occasionnelles.
SCPA 536 : Le DÉC en mileu autochtone. Partie I (3 crédits)
Ce cours aide les participant-e-s à étudier des enjeux spécifiques liés au développement économique autochtone, en particulier le contexte (réserve, milieu urbain, rural ou nordique), ainsi qu’à affronter des défis fréquents en DÉC autochtone. Le cours étudie également les rapports historiques et contemporains entre les communautés autochtones et les forces culturelles et économiques prédominantes, et compare les pratiques organisationnelles et économiques traditionnelles avec les nouvelles approches que propose le DÉC.
SCPA 537 : Le DÉC en mileu autochtone. Partie II (3 crédits)
Préalable : SCPA 536.
Ce cours utilise une approche d’étude de cas pour évaluer une ou plusieurs stratégies de développement économique communautaire en contexte autochtone. Un survol historique de cette expérience dessine le contexte qui a façonné ces stratégies autant que leurs résultats. Les approches de DÉC sont examinées dans le contexte de cette expérience particulière. Cela peut comprendre la visite de sites et des conférences occasionnelles.
Sessions ouvertes
SCPA 543 : A - Z Sessions ouvertes (1 crédit chacune)
Les thèmes et contenu des diverses sessions ouvertes sont déterminés au début de chaque année académique. Trois sessions ouvertes sont offertes chaque année (1 crédit chacune sur un total de 3 crédits). Voici quelques-uns des sujets possibles : les approches féministes en développement économique communautaire, le lobbying auprès d’instances décisionnelles, la gestion consensuelle, et la formation de coalitions et l’usage d’internet dans un but de développement communautaire - de même que des sujets liés à l’actualité.
SOAN 800 General Seminar (6 credits)
This course focuses on orientating the common epistemological interests of sociological and anthropological approaches to social and cultural analysis in the four areas of specialization. In order to maximize interdisciplinary coverage, the seminar is led by two faculty members, one trained in sociology and one in anthropology.
SOAN 820 Professional Development
This course is designed as a seminar in which guest speakers orally present the results of their work and practical information on various professional skills (professionalization). Students are exposed to a variety of research conducted in the two disciplines and acquire communication and teaching skills necessary for working in the real world (defined as both academic and non-academic). Students learn how to present research results to a variety of audiences, how to address issues related to university teaching, and how to deal with ethical issues in the research context. The course is graded as Pass/Fail. It is mandatory for all students in the program. Each week, students must submit a written report on the presentation of the previous week.
SOAN 840 General Seminar
Designed as a preparation to the research involved in the thesis, the second general seminar focuses on the development of writing and research capacities, preparing research proposals, addressing issues in theory and method in relation to various topics, covering literature reviews. One faculty member is responsible for this seminar.
SOAN 850 Comprehensive Exam l (6 credits)
SOAN 860 Comprehensive Exam ll (6 credits)
Towards the end of their first year in the program, and in consultation with their thesis supervisor, PhD students form an advisory committee of three faculty members, including their supervisor, to assist in the preparation of the comprehensive exams (6 credits each). A core reading list consists of approximately 25 titles for each exam. The ultimate goal of the exams is to establish a candidate’s academic specialization. After completing the exams, students should have acquired sufficient background to teach a course and/or conduct advanced research in the area.
The examinations normally take place before the end of the student’s second year in the program. Each exam takes the form of a written essay (20-25 pages) that the student has three weeks to write. The student’s advisory committee members evaluate the exam as earning a grade of pass or fail. To constitute a successful exam, it must receive a grade of pass from all three members of the committee. Students who fail one of these exams are allowed to take it for a second time during the following term. A second failure leads to the student’s withdrawal from the program.
SOAN 870 Thesis Proposal
A candidate who has successfully completed the course requirements and the comprehensive exams must submit a thesis proposal to the Graduate Program Director and the thesis committee. The thesis committee, selected in consultation with the GPD, is composed of three members representing both Sociology and Anthropology. It may be the student’s initial advisory committee. The thesis proposal should describe the topic of the thesis, situate it in the relevant literature, and discuss the intended research methods. The written version of the proposal is approved by the members of the thesis committee and followed by an oral defense before the committee members. Following this, the PhD candidate is invited to present his thesis proposal in a departmental seminar.
SOAN 890 Thesis (57 credits)
Doctoral candidates submit a thesis based on their research and defend it in an oral examination. The thesis is expected to make an original contribution to knowledge, to be based on primary sources and to be presented in an acceptable form. The thesis should normally be no more than 400 pages in length (or equivalent if a non-literary format is used).
ANTH 691 Fieldwork: Stage (6 credits)
The fieldwork requirement, which may last from 3-4 months, involves undertaking research in a community which differs in important respects from the student’s community of reference, and collecting ethnographic data. This research forms the basis of the student’s thesis.
ANTH 692 Thesis (18 credits)
The thesis is required to demonstrate that the student has been able to carry out independent field research. It should be a work of near publishable quality. The thesis is evaluated by the student’s Thesis Committee and one other faculty member. The student is also required to defend the thesis orally before the above-mentioned examiners.
ANTH 693 Essay Proposal
Students develop a research proposal under the direction of their supervisor, including a preliminary reading list.
ANTH 694 Bibliographic Research (6 credits)
Students spend two to three months reviewing the literature (which may include both academic and grey literature sources) on their proposed topic. The review forms the basis of the students' essay.
ANTH 695 Essay (15 credits)
The essay is written under the supervision of one faculty member and is evaluated by two faculty members, including the supervisor. It can either be a literature review of a substantive nature, or a report on empirical research. Students are expected to submit work of publishable or near publishable quality. The appropriate length of the essay is approximately 40 pages.
* Subject matter varies from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course provided that the course content has changed.
SOCI 691 Thesis (21 credits)
Students enrolled in the thesis option are required to demonstrate their ability to carry out independent research which reflects a scientific approach. The thesis proposal, SOCI 690 (prepared within the confines of the thesis tutorial) will serve as the basis for the elaboration of the actual thesis, SOCI 691. This will take the form of a written thesis (21 credits) of at least article length. The student will then orally defend the thesis before an examining committee. The thesis may be written in either English or French.
SOCI 695 Essay (18 credits)
The essay is written under the supervision of one faculty member and is evaluated by two faculty members, including the supervisor. It can either be a literature review of a substantive nature, or a report on empirical research. Students are expected to submit work of publishable or near publishable quality. The appropriate length of the essay is approximately 40 pages.
Selected Topics
The offerings for the following courses will be reviewed each year in light of the interest of students and faculty members. Five elective courses are offered each academic year from the list given below. Courses numbered “700” are advanced studies and normally will be conducted on a tutorial basis. The corresponding 600-level course is a prerequisite to the 700-level course. All courses listed below are worth 3 credits unless otherwise noted.
SOCI 620/720 Population and Society
SOCI 622/722 Studies in Race and Ethnicity
SOCI 625/725 Sociology of Culture
SOCI 626/726 North American Societies
SOCI 627/727 Social Movements and Social Change
SOCI 632/732 Sociology of the Family
SOCI 633/733 Sociology of Knowledge
SOCI 635/735 Gender Studies
SOCI 637/737 Development
SOCI 638/738 The City
SOCI 639/739 Social Problems
SOCI 640/740 Community Studies
SOCI 642/742 Studies in Governance
SOCI 644/744 Sociology of the Body
SOCI 645/745 Sociology of Men
SOCI 646/746 Globalization
SOCI 647/747 Democracy and Citizenship
SOCI 648/748 Health, Illness and Medicine
SOCI 649/749 Media and Communication
SOCI 652/752 Self and Subjectivity
SOCI 653/753 Intellectual Biography
Additional Topics, Thesis, and Essay
SOCI 601 Topics in Advanced Theory
SOCI 611 Topics in Advanced Methodology
SOCI 650/750 Special Topic in Sociology I
SOCI 651/751 Special Topic in Sociology II
SOCI 691 Thesis (21 credits)
SOCI 695 Essay (18 credits)
THEO 603 Method in Theology (3 credits), THEO 604 Theological Hermeneutics (3 credits), THEO 605 Methods in Biblical Studies (3 credits), THEO 690 Annotated Bibilography and Thesis Proposal (6 credits).
Electives: 9 credits from THEO 620-675.
Thesis: THEO 697 Thesis (21 credits).
Option B: MA with Applied Project in Theology
Required courses: THEO 603 Method in Theology (3 credits), THEO 604 Theological Hermeneutics (3 credits), THEO 605 Methods in Biblical Studies (3 credits).
Electives: 18 credits from THEO 620-675.
Research: THEO 691 Research Paper (9 credits), THEO 692 Applied Project in Theology (9 credits).
Courses
The required THEO 603 and THEO 605 will be offered in alternate years. THEO 604 will be offered every two years or as needed.
The courses offered are one-term, 3-credit courses unless otherwise indicated. A list designating which specific courses are to be offered in any given year, with description of content, will be compiled and distributed prior to registration.
Topic Courses
Topics in Scripture
THEO 621 Old Testament I
THEO 623 Old Testament II
THEO 627 Questions in Old Testament Research
THEO 629 Intertestament Studies
THEO 631 New Testament I
THEO 633 New Testament II
THEO 635 New Testament III
THEO 637 Questions in New Testament Research
THEO 639 Biblical Studies
Topics in Church History
THEO 641 History I
THEO 643 History II
THEO 645 History III
THEO 647 Research in History of Christian Thought
THEO 649 Questions in Christian Worship
Topics in Theology
THEO 651 Theology I
THEO 653 Theology II
THEO 655 Theology III
THEO 657 Questions in Theological Research
THEO 661 Ecclesiology I
THEO 663 Ecclesiology II
THEO 664 Ecclesiology III
THEO 667 Research In Ecclesiology
THEO 669 Theology & World Religions
Topics in Christian Ethics
THEO 671 Ethics I
THEO 673 Ethics II
THEO 675 Issues in Ethical Research
THEO 603 Method in Theology (3 credits)
This course introduces students to theological method: the questions, insights, and philosophical presuppositions that determine theological frameworks with some attention to modern systematic theology and Christian ethics. Students acquire a differentiated appreciation for the types of theology, the scope of distinct theological fields, and their research horizons.
THEO 604 Theological Hermeneutics (3 credits)
This course introduces students to the notion of church as interpretative community, and to experience diverse ways of utilizing this notion. Students develop an understanding of the basic principles of theological hermeneutics (the science or theory of interpretation), including a survey of the history of the disciple from early times up to present day.
THEO 605 Methods in Biblical Studies (3 credits)
This course focuses on tools and methods employed in biblical studies and ancient literature related to the Bible (up to 600 CE). Synchronic and diachronic approaches are discussed but the course focuses primarily on diachronic methods (form and genre criticism, comparative method, etc.) Students are trained to develop skills in analyzing texts using biblical methods.
THEO 690 Annotated Bibliography and Thesis Proposal (6 credits)
The annotated bibliography and thesis proposal constitute preliminary phases necessary for the writing of the MA thesis. The annotated bibliography and thesis proposal are supervised by the supervisor of the thesis and are assessed on a pass/fail basis.
Note: Students who have received credit for THEO 685 or 695 may not take this course for credit.
THEO 691 Research Paper (9 credits)
The guided research project involves the preparation of a substantial research paper. It may be prepared in conjunction with any seminar course but will be separate from the basic course requirements.
THEO 692 Applied Project in Theology (9 credits)
The aim of this course is to give the student the opportunity to engage in critical theological reflection by frequenting a milieu where theological interpretation occurs on a regular basis (e.g. a local parish, a confessional school, a religious formation program like the Christian Training Program, religious programming in the media, etc.) in order to assess the theological models presupposed in the activity studied. The practicum will include a 3 credit reading component related to the field of study.
THEO 697 Thesis (21 credits)
The thesis shall consist in the presentation of the research results. Each thesis shall be examined by a committee consisting of the student’s supervisor and by at least two other scholars from the Department. The remaining regulations concerning the thesis examination are in accordance with the School of Graduate Studies (See Thesis Regulations).
Cognate Courses
With permission of the Graduate Program Director up to 6 credits may be chosen from graduate offerings in other Departments at Concordia or other universities. Permission of the graduate director of the respective program must also be granted.
ENGR 6971 Project and Report I (4 credits). The purpose of the project report is to provide students in the MEng program with an opportunity to carry out independent project work and to present it in an acceptable form. The project may consist of the following:
A theoretical study of an engineering problem.
A design and/or development project conducted at Concordia.
A design and/or project conducted as part of the student’s full-time employment, providing the student’s employer furnishes written approval for the pursuit and reporting of the project.
An ordered and critical exposition of the literature on an appropriate topic in engineering.
Before registration for a project course, a student must obtain written consent of a faculty member who will act as advisor for the report. A form for this consent is available in the Office of the Dean of Engineering and Computer Science.
A four-credit report is due on the last day of classes of the term (fall, winter, summer) in which it is registered. Students are expected to have a preliminary version of their report approved by their advisor before its final submission. On or before the submission deadline, students must submit three copies of the report to their advisors, who will grade the report. One copy of the report will be returned to the students, one retained by the advisors, and one by the department.
The report, including an abstract, must be suitably documented and illustrated, should be at least 5000 words in length, must be typewritten on one side of 21.5 cm by 28 cm white paper of quality, and must be enclosed in binding. Students are referred to Form and Style: Thesis, Report, Term Papers, fourth edition by Campbell and Ballou, published by Houghton Migglin.
ENGR 6981 Project and Report II (4 credits)
ENGR 6991 Project and Report III (5 credits)
With the permission of their Department, students in the MEng Program may register for these project courses if they wish to carry out a more extended project, or if they wish to complete further projects. Each project course requires prior approval by the faculty member who has accepted to supervise the work. Students working on a multi-course project must register for the corresponding project courses in successive terms. For ENGR 6991 and multi-course projects, the report is due on the last day of classes of the last term in which they are registered. In the case of ENGR 6991 and multi-course project, three copies of the report must be submitted to the advisor on or before this deadline, and students are also required to make an oral presentation to the evaluators, and other members of the community. The report will be evaluated by the advisor and at least one other Engineering and Computer Science member of the Gina Cody School.
Industrial Experience Option in the Master of Engineering
Applicants to the Master of Engineering may apply to the Industrial Experience option in the industrial milieu through the Institute for Co-operative Education. Students should indicate their choice on the application form. The Institute for Co-operative Education will help them with resumes, cover letters and interview techniques. The suggested schedule is as follows: fall and winter terms will be dedicated to course work followed by one term in industry, culminating with two terms in University for the remaining course work. The industrial experience term will be noted on the student transcript/record.
Students apply to the Industrial Experience option as early as possible, preferably when they enter the program. It is preferable to be bilingual in French and English if they wish to work in Quebec. Students who lack good language skills and still want to be part of the program should improve their language skills prior to final acceptance.
Admission Criteria
Students need to be enrolled in the Industrial Experience option at least the semester before going on a work term. They begin applying for jobs the semester prior to the work term. Previous work experience cannot be used toward credit for the ENCS 6931. Students should have good grades (greater than a CGPA of 3.40) for the master’s program, be full-time and have good communication skills. A Canadian work permit is required. The Departmental Co-op Program Director will recommend final acceptance to the Industrial Experience option.
ENCS 6931 Industrial Stage and Training (9 credits)
Prerequisite: Completion of at least twenty credits in the program and permission of the Departmental Co-op Program Director.
This is an integral component of the Industrial Experience option that is to be completed under the supervision of an experienced engineer/computer scientist in the facilities of a participating company (a Canadian work permit is required).
Each student receives an assessment from the Departmental Co-op Program Director in consultation with the industry supervisor and the faculty advisor. Grading is on a pass/fail basis based on a proposal, monthly progress reports, a final report and a presentation.
Top
ENGR 6971 Project and Report I (4 credits). The purpose of the project report is to provide students in the MEng program with an opportunity to carry out independent project work and to present it in an acceptable form. The project may consist of the following:
A theoretical study of an engineering problem.
A design and/or development project conducted at Concordia.
A design and/or project conducted as part of the student’s full-time employment, providing the student’s employer furnishes written approval for the pursuit and reporting of the project.
An ordered and critical exposition of the literature on an appropriate topic in engineering.
Before registration for a project course, a student must obtain written consent of a faculty member who will act as advisor for the report. A form for this consent is available in the Office of the Dean of Engineering and Computer Science.
A four-credit report is due on the last day of classes of the term (fall, winter, summer) in which it is registered. Students are expected to have a preliminary version of their report approved by their advisor before its final submission. On or before the submission deadline, students must submit three copies of the report to their advisors, who will grade the report. One copy of the report will be returned to the students, one retained by the advisors, and one by the department.
The report, including an abstract, must be suitably documented and illustrated, should be at least 5000 words in length, must be typewritten on one side of 21.5 cm by 28 cm white paper of quality, and must be enclosed in binding. Students are referred to Form and Style: Thesis, Report, Term Papers, fourth edition by Campbell and Ballou, published by Houghton Migglin.
ENGR 6981 Project and Report II (4 credits)
ENGR 6991 Project and Report III (5 credits)
With the permission of their Department, students in the MEng Program may register for these project courses if they wish to carry out a more extended project, or if they wish to complete further projects. Each project course requires prior approval by the faculty member who has accepted to supervise the work. Students working on a multi-course project must register for the corresponding project courses in successive terms. For ENGR 6991 and multi-course projects, the report is due on the last day of classes of the last term in which they are registered. In the case of ENGR 6991 and multi-course project, three copies of the report must be submitted to the advisor on or before this deadline, and students are also required to make an oral presentation to the evaluators, and other members of the community. The report will be evaluated by the advisor and at least one other Engineering and Computer Science member of the Gina Cody School.
Industrial Experience Option in the Master of Engineering
Applicants to the Master of Engineering may apply to the Industrial Experience option in the industrial milieu through the Institute for Co-operative Education. Students should indicate their choice on the application form. The Institute for Co-operative Education will help them with resumes, cover letters and interview techniques. The suggested schedule is as follows: fall and winter terms will be dedicated to course work followed by one term in industry, culminating with two terms in University for the remaining course work. The industrial experience term will be noted on the student transcript/record.
Students apply to the Industrial Experience option as early as possible, preferably when they enter the program. It is preferable to be bilingual in French and English if they wish to work in Quebec. Students who lack good language skills and still want to be part of the program should improve their language skills prior to final acceptance.
Admission Criteria
Students need to be enrolled in the Industrial Experience option at least the semester before going on a work term. They begin applying for jobs the semester prior to the work term. Previous work experience cannot be used toward credit for the ENCS 6931. Students should have good grades (greater than a CGPA of 3.40) for the master’s program, be full-time and have good communication skills. A Canadian work permit is required. The Departmental Co-op Program Director will recommend final acceptance to the Industrial Experience option.
ENCS 6931 Industrial Stage and Training (9 credits)
Prerequisite: Completion of at least twenty credits in the program and permission of the Departmental Co-op Program Director.
This is an integral component of the Industrial Experience option that is to be completed under the supervision of an experienced engineer/computer scientist in the facilities of a participating company (a Canadian work permit is required).
Each student receives an assessment from the Departmental Co-op Program Director in consultation with the industry supervisor and the faculty advisor. Grading is on a pass/fail basis based on a proposal, monthly progress reports, a final report and a presentation.
Top
ENGR 6971 Project and Report I (4 credits). The purpose of the project report is to provide students in the MEng program with an opportunity to carry out independent project work and to present it in an acceptable form. The project may consist of the following:
A theoretical study of an engineering problem.
A design and/or development project conducted at Concordia.
A design and/or project conducted as part of the student’s full-time employment, providing the student’s employer furnishes written approval for the pursuit and reporting of the project.
An ordered and critical exposition of the literature on an appropriate topic in engineering.
Before registration for a project course, a student must obtain written consent of a faculty member who will act as advisor for the report. A form for this consent is available in the Office of the Dean of Engineering and Computer Science.
A four-credit report is due on the last day of classes of the term (fall, winter, summer) in which it is registered. Students are expected to have a preliminary version of their report approved by their advisor before its final submission. On or before the submission deadline, students must submit three copies of the report to their advisors, who will grade the report. One copy of the report will be returned to the students, one retained by the advisors, and one by the department.
The report, including an abstract, must be suitably documented and illustrated, should be at least 5000 words in length, must be typewritten on one side of 21.5 cm by 28 cm white paper of quality, and must be enclosed in binding. Students are referred to Form and Style: Thesis, Report, Term Papers, fourth edition by Campbell and Ballou, published by Houghton Migglin.
ENGR 6981 Project and Report II (4 credits)
ENGR 6991 Project and Report III (5 credits)
With the permission of their Department, students in the MEng Program may register for these project courses if they wish to carry out a more extended project, or if they wish to complete further projects. Each project course requires prior approval by the faculty member who has accepted to supervise the work. Students working on a multi-course project must register for the corresponding project courses in successive terms. For ENGR 6991 and multi-course projects, the report is due on the last day of classes of the last term in which they are registered. In the case of ENGR 6991 and multi-course project, three copies of the report must be submitted to the advisor on or before this deadline, and students are also required to make an oral presentation to the evaluators, and other members of the community. The report will be evaluated by the advisor and at least one other Engineering and Computer Science member of the Gina Cody School.
Industrial Experience Option in the Master of Engineering
Applicants to the Master of Engineering may apply to the Industrial Experience option in the industrial milieu through the Institute for Co-operative Education. Students should indicate their choice on the application form. The Institute for Co-operative Education will help them with resumes, cover letters and interview techniques. The suggested schedule is as follows: fall and winter terms will be dedicated to course work followed by one term in industry, culminating with two terms in University for the remaining course work. The industrial experience term will be noted on the student transcript/record.
Students apply to the Industrial Experience option as early as possible, preferably when they enter the program. It is preferable to be bilingual in French and English if they wish to work in Quebec. Students who lack good language skills and still want to be part of the program should improve their language skills prior to final acceptance.
Admission Criteria
Students need to be enrolled in the Industrial Experience option at least the semester before going on a work term. They begin applying for jobs the semester prior to the work term. Previous work experience cannot be used toward credit for the ENCS 6931. Students should have good grades (greater than a CGPA of 3.40) for the master’s program, be full-time and have good communication skills. A Canadian work permit is required. The Departmental Co-op Program Director will recommend final acceptance to the Industrial Experience option.
ENCS 6931 Industrial Stage and Training (9 credits)
Prerequisite: Completion of at least twenty credits in the program and permission of the Departmental Co-op Program Director.
This is an integral component of the Industrial Experience option that is to be completed under the supervision of an experienced engineer/computer scientist in the facilities of a participating company (a Canadian work permit is required).
Each student receives an assessment from the Departmental Co-op Program Director in consultation with the industry supervisor and the faculty advisor. Grading is on a pass/fail basis based on a proposal, monthly progress reports, a final report and a presentation.
Top
ENGR 6971 Project and Report I (4 credits). The purpose of the project report is to provide students in the MEng program with an opportunity to carry out independent project work and to present it in an acceptable form. The project may consist of the following:
A theoretical study of an engineering problem.
A design and/or development project conducted at Concordia.
A design and/or project conducted as part of the student’s full-time employment, providing the student’s employer furnishes written approval for the pursuit and reporting of the project.
An ordered and critical exposition of the literature on an appropriate topic in engineering.
Before registration for a project course, a student must obtain written consent of a faculty member who will act as advisor for the report. A form for this consent is available in the Office of the Dean of Engineering and Computer Science.
A four-credit report is due on the last day of classes of the term (fall, winter, summer) in which it is registered. Students are expected to have a preliminary version of their report approved by their advisor before its final submission. On or before the submission deadline, students must submit three copies of the report to their advisors, who will grade the report. One copy of the report will be returned to the students, one retained by the advisors, and one by the department.
The report, including an abstract, must be suitably documented and illustrated, should be at least 5000 words in length, must be typewritten on one side of 21.5 cm by 28 cm white paper of quality, and must be enclosed in binding. Students are referred to Form and Style: Thesis, Report, Term Papers, fourth edition by Campbell and Ballou, published by Houghton Migglin.
ENGR 6981 Project and Report II (4 credits)
ENGR 6991 Project and Report III (5 credits)
With the permission of their Department, students in the MEng Program may register for these project courses if they wish to carry out a more extended project, or if they wish to complete further projects. Each project course requires prior approval by the faculty member who has accepted to supervise the work. Students working on a multi-course project must register for the corresponding project courses in successive terms. For ENGR 6991 and multi-course projects, the report is due on the last day of classes of the last term in which they are registered. In the case of ENGR 6991 and multi-course project, three copies of the report must be submitted to the advisor on or before this deadline, and students are also required to make an oral presentation to the evaluators, and other members of the community. The report will be evaluated by the advisor and at least one other Engineering and Computer Science member of the Gina Cody School.
Industrial Experience Option in the Master of Engineering
Applicants to the Master of Engineering may apply to the Industrial Experience option in the industrial milieu through the Institute for Co-operative Education. Students should indicate their choice on the application form. The Institute for Co-operative Education will help them with resumes, cover letters and interview techniques. The suggested schedule is as follows: fall and winter terms will be dedicated to course work followed by one term in industry, culminating with two terms in University for the remaining course work. The industrial experience term will be noted on the student transcript/record.
Students apply to the Industrial Experience option as early as possible, preferably when they enter the program. It is preferable to be bilingual in French and English if they wish to work in Quebec. Students who lack good language skills and still want to be part of the program should improve their language skills prior to final acceptance.
Admission Criteria
Students need to be enrolled in the Industrial Experience option at least the semester before going on a work term. They begin applying for jobs the semester prior to the work term. Previous work experience cannot be used toward credit for the ENCS 6931. Students should have good grades (greater than a CGPA of 3.40) for the master’s program, be full-time and have good communication skills. A Canadian work permit is required. The Departmental Co-op Program Director will recommend final acceptance to the Industrial Experience option.
ENCS 6931 Industrial Stage and Training (9 credits)
Prerequisite: Completion of at least twenty credits in the program and permission of the Departmental Co-op Program Director.
This is an integral component of the Industrial Experience option that is to be completed under the supervision of an experienced engineer/computer scientist in the facilities of a participating company (a Canadian work permit is required).
Each student receives an assessment from the Departmental Co-op Program Director in consultation with the industry supervisor and the faculty advisor. Grading is on a pass/fail basis based on a proposal, monthly progress reports, a final report and a presentation.
Top
CIVI 7901 Environmental Engineering Research Project (9 credits): The proposed topic for the project must be selected in consultation with a faculty supervisor. The Environmental Engineering Research project report will be evaluated by two faculty members from the Department.
A minimum of 12 credits chosen from those Course Groups of List B other than the group chosen in (1) above. These groups of courses could include special program courses put on for or by a given industry in conjunction with the Gina Cody School.
A maximum of 4 credits chosen from the Engineering Courses section, which include E72 (MBA courses).
List B: Course Groups in Environmental Engineering Program
Group 1 - Environmental Engineering and Water Resources:
Topic Areas: E33, E36, E37
Group 2 - Geotechnical and Transportation Engineering:
Topic Areas: E03, E34, E35
Group 3 - Structural Engineering:
Topic Areas: E06, E31, E32
Group 4 - Construction Engineering and Management:
Topic Areas: E21, E24
MECH 6961 Aerospace Case Study I (3 credits)
MECH 6971 Aerospace Case Study II (3 credits)
ENGR 7961 Industrial Stage and Training (6 credits)
Prerequisite: Completion of at least twelve credits in the composite option and at least twenty-one credits in the aerospace program or permission of program director.
This is an integral component of the aerospace program and the composites option in the Mechanical Engineering program that is to be completed under the supervision of an experienced engineer in the facilities of a participating company (Canadian work permit is required). The topic is to be decided by a mutual agreement between the student, the participating company and the program director. The course is graded on the basis of the student’s performance during the work period, which includes a technical report.
There may be some restrictions placed on students chosen for the industry sponsored “stage”. For those students who are unable to obtain an industrial stage, it is possible to take ENGR 7961 for a project carried out at the university. Such students must obtain the approval of the program director.
Career Prospects. In Montreal, graduates have found work in companies such as Pratt & Whitney Canada, Bell Helicopter, CAE Electronics, Bombardier Aerospace, and others. They hold positions as varied as consulting engineers, aircraft designers, manufacturing plant managers, vice presidents, and chief executive officers. Some have also gone on to form their own companies, while others have taken jobs across Canada and abroad. A number of our graduates hold teaching positions in several universities across North America and in other countries.
ENGR 8901 Master of Applied Science Research and Thesis (29 credits)
ENGR 8911 Doctoral Research and Thesis
INSE 8901 Master of Applied Science Research and Thesis (25 credits)
E63 - PROJECT, REPORT AND INDUSTRIAL TRAINING
ENCS 6931 Industrial Stage and Training
ELEC 6961 Graduate Seminar in Electrical and Computer Engineering
INSE 6961 Graduate Seminar in Information and Systems Engineering
ENGR 692 Case Study and Report
ENGR 6971 Project and Report I
ENGR 6981 Project and Report II
ENGR 6991 Project and Report III
INDU 6990 Industrial Engineering Capstone
INDU 6991 Engineering Management Industrial Stage I
INDU 6992 Engineering Management Industrial Stage II
E66 - SYSTEMS ENGINEERING
INSE 6311 Sustainable Infrastructure Planning and Management Systems
INSE 6400 Principles of Systems Engineering
INSE 6411 Product Design Theory and Methodology
INSE 6421 Systems Integration and Testing
INSE 6431 Ad Hoc Wireless Networks: Architectures and Protocols
E67 - 3D GRAPHICS AND INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
INSE 6510 Video Game Technology and Development
INSE 6530 3D Graphics and Computer Animation for Game Design
E68 - QUALITY SYSTEMS ENGINEERING
INSE 6210 Total Quality Methodologies in Engineering
INSE 6220 Advanced Statistical Approaches to Quality
INSE 6230 Total Quality Project Management
INSE 6240 Executive Communication
INSE 6250 Quality Methodologies for Software
INSE 6260 Software Quality Assurance
INSE 6270 Quality-Based Systems Engineering
INSE 6280 Quality Assurance for Systems Engineering
INSE 6290 Quality in Supply Chain Design
INSE 6300 Quality Assurance in Supply Chain Management
INSE 6310 Systems Engineering Maintenance Management
E69 - INFORMATION SYSTEMS SECURITY
INSE 6110 Foundations of Cryptography
INSE 6120 Crypto-Protocol and Network Security
INSE 6130 Operating Systems Security
INSE 6140 Malware Defenses and Application Security
INSE 6150 Security Evaluation Methodologies
INSE 6160 Database Security and Privacy
INSE 6170 Network Security Architecture and Management
INSE 6180 Security and Privacy Implications of Data Mining
INSE 6190 Wireless Network Security
INSE 6610 Cybercrime Investigations
INSE 6620 Cloud Computing Security and Privacy
INSE 6630 Recent Developments in Information Systems Security
INSE 6640 Smart Grids and Control System Security
INSE 6650 Trusted Computing
INSE 6660 Secure Programming
INSE 6670 Embedded Systems Security
INSE 6680 Systems Physical Security
E70 - INFORMATION SYSTEMS ENGINEERING
INSE 6100 Advanced Java Platforms
INSE 6320 Risk Analysis for Information and Systems Engineering
INSE 6441 Applied Game Theory and Mechanism Design
INSE 7100 Design and Analysis of Security Protocols
INSE 7110 Value Added Service Engineering in Next Generation Networks
INSE 7120 Advanced Network Management
E71 - COMPUTER SCIENCE
See courses listed for Topic Areas C01 to C07 in Computer Science and Software Engineering Section.
E72 - BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION PROGRAM
MBA 607 Financial Accounting for Managerial Decisions
MBA 608 Managerial Statistics
MBA 614 Financial Management
MBA 616 Operations Management
MBA 628 Management Accounting
E73 - SOFTWARE ENGINEERING
See courses listed for Topic Areas C08 to C13 in Computer Science and Software Engineering Section.
F03 - APPLICATION SPECIFIC INTEGRATED CIRCUITS
COEN 6501 Digital System Design and Synthesis
COEN 6511 VLSI Circuit Design
COEN 6521 Design for Testability
COEN 6531 ASIC Synthesis
COEN 6541 Functional Hardware Verification
COEN 6551 Formal Hardware Verification
ELEC 6051 Introduction to Analog VLSI
ELEC 6071 Mixed-Signal VLSI for Communication Systems (*)
ELEC 6081 Modern Analog Filter Design
(*) Cross-listed courses
(***) Available only to students admitted prior to September 1997.
(****) Students admitted prior to September 1997 are not allowed to substitute ENCS 8011 for an equivalent course work.
Course Descriptions
Building Engineering
BCEE 6961 Graduate Seminar in Building and Civil Engineering (1 credit)
MEng students must attend a set of seminars identified by the Department and submit a comprehensive report on selected topics. The report, including an abstract, must be suitably documented and illustrated, should be at least 1000 words in length, must be type-written on one side of 21.5 cm by 28 cm white paper of quality, and must be enclosed in binding. Students are referred to Form and Style: Thesis, Reports, Term Papers, fourth edition by Campbell and Ballou, published by Houghton Mifflin.
Note: This course cannot be taken by MASc or PhD students.
BLDG 6061 Structural Systems for Buildings (4 credits)
Building components and assembled systems. Structural efficiency and economy: rigid frames, shear walls, framed tube, latticed structures; membrane, air and cable supported structures. Selection and preliminary design of building structural systems, materials and components. Case studies.
BLDG 6071 Wind Engineering and Building Aerodynamics (4 credits)
Atmospheric circulations; atmospheric boundary layer; wind structure; wind speed and turbulence measurements; bluff body aerodynamics; mean and fluctuating wind forces on buildings; internal wind pressures; along-wind, across-wind and torsional building response to wind; snow drifting and accumulation problems; dispersion of gaseous pollutants. A case study or a project is required.
BLDG 6111 Computer-Aided Building Operation (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 6711.
Computer systems for energy management, including scheduling and operation of HVAC systems and lighting. Applications for intelligent buildings. Use of simulation and knowledge-based software for automatic regulation of building operation. Diagnosis of malfunctions and modifications of operations. Computerized building security systems. Actions during extraordinary conditions such as fire emergencies. A project is required.
BLDG 6151 Database Applications in Building and Civil Engineering (4 credits)
Components, properties and limits of databases and database management systems (DBMS). Database requirements for engineering tasks. Design of database schema and implementation in commercially available DBMS. Engineering data modelling techniques. Topics include: the entity/relationship model; the relational data model; the standard database language SQL; and the object-oriented data model. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken ENGR 6151 may not take this course for credit.
BLDG 6221 Design of Computer-Aided Systems in Building and Civil Engineering (4 credits)
Object-oriented modelling of physical components, design objectives, performance requirements and engineering processes. Identification of objects and definition of their arrangement and interaction to model engineering processes. Overview of the life-cycle of an engineering software project. Project on implementation of a small scale computer-aided engineering system.
Note: Students who have taken ENGR 6221 may not take this course for credit.
BLDG 6231 Applications of Artificial Intelligence in Building and Civil Engineering (4 credits)
Introduction to artificial intelligence techniques in an engineering context; heuristic search methods, logical reasoning, knowledge-based systems, neural networks, genetics algorithms, and case-based reasoning. Algorithmic versus knowledge-based programming for engineering applications. Emphasis on knowledge-based systems and their characteristics, capabilities and limitations. Case studies in design, failure diagnosis and processing of standards. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken ENGR 6231 may not take this course for credit.
BLDG 6241 Building Information Modelling in Construction (4 credits)
Topics include introduction to Building Information Modelling (BIM) technologies; BIM implementation at different project stages - pre-construction, construction, and facility management; BIM-Aided design alternatives, constructability analysis, and development of space-time-cost models; BIM visualization for trade coordination and processes monitoring. A project is required.
BLDG 6541 Heat Transfer (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the Bachelor of/Baccalaureate in Engineering (Building) Program).
Steady state heat conduction. Convection and radiation heat exchange. Refrigeration cycles. Theory of air vapour mixtures. Introduction to heat transfer in building environment. Unsteady state of heat transfer. Case studies.
BLDG 6561 Building Economics I (*) (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the Bachelor of/Baccalaureate in Engineering (Building) Program).
Development of economic performance measures of interest to developers, owners, contractors and users. Sources of finance and the determinants of the cost of money. Elementary estimating; cost indices; forecasting techniques; value of money; economic comparison techniques; evaluation of projects in private and public sectors; tax regulations; inflation; life-cycle costing; risk analysis; non-economic attributes. Case studies of economic analysis of projects, single building and building components. A project is required.
BLDG 6571 Project Management (4 credits)
Introduction to managing the development, design and construction of buildings. Examination of project management for the total development process, including inter-relationships between owners, developers, financing sources, designers, contractors and users; methods of project delivery; introduction to planning and scheduling; role and tasks of the project manager; feasibility analyses; construction claims; financing and cash-flow analysis; government regulations; environmental and social constraints; introduction to control of cost, time and technical performance; human factors; computer applications. A project is required.
BLDG 6581 Decision Analysis (4 credits)
Development of a basic theory of decision making under uncertainty. Rationales of decision makers, utility, the concept of the value of perfect information. The Bayesian approach to decision making; pre-posterior analysis and optimal fixed-sized analysis for random processes. Decision analysis with multiple objective, structuring the problem, multi-attributed utility functions, case studies. A project is required.
BLDG 6591 Computer-Aided Building Design (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisites: BLDG 6561.
Identification of objectives, decision variables, processes and information flow in building design. Application and evaluation of computer systems to components of the building design process. Determination of decision variables in problem modelling and sensitivity of results. Current applications in structural analysis and design, space layout, electrical distribution systems, HVAC design, lighting design, estimating, specification editing and scheduling. Evaluation of issues of interdisciplinary information control and interchange. A project is required.
BLDG 6601 Building Enclosure (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent).
Prerequisite: BLDG 6611.
Schematic and detail design of walls, windows and roofs. Complex building types will be examined to show the relationships between massing, materials, energy conservation and building use. Solar shading, daylighting, rainscreen and air barrier principles will be emphasized. A project is required.
BLDG 6611 Building Science (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the Bachelor of/Baccalaureate in Engineering (Building) Program).
Environmental exterior and interior influences on inner environmental control. Topics include: thermal energy exchanges, psychrometrics, vapour and fluid flow, air leakage, ventilation and design comfort conditions, selection of materials and building systems. A case study or a project is required.
BLDG 6621 Modern Building Materials (*) (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent).
Prerequisite: BLDG 6611 previously or concurrently.
Structural, thermal and acoustical properties of new building materials such as: plastics, synthetic fibres, adhesives, sealants, caulking compounds, forams, sandwich panels, composites, polymer-concrete systems, fibre-reinforced concretes, plastic mortars, polymers for flooring, roofing, synthetic wall papers. Consideration of corrosion, bio- and thermal degradation, stability under ultraviolet and solar radiation. A project is required.
BLDG 6631 Fundamentals of Facility Management (4 credits)
Systems approach to planning, organization and implementation of a facility, including space allocation, leasing and marketing, operation, maintenance, and renovation over the life of the building. Forecast of budget requirements for effective operation, maintenance, and renovation. Correlation between the operation of the building and health risks, comfort, productivity, and costs. Integrated approach to the planning, analysis, evaluation, organization and optimization of physical systems of facilities. Case studies.
BLDG 6641 Industrialized Building (4 credits)
Trends toward off-site fabrication of buildings. Needs and technical requirements of international markets. Principal types of industrialized systems, materials and components. Optimization of industrialized production. Planning, design, construction and maintenance. Codes and standards. A case study and project.
BLDG 6651 Fire and Smoke Control in Buildings (*) (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent).
Prerequisite: BLDG 6611.
Topics treated include: fire and smoke control; failure mechanisms of building enclosure, illustrated by case studies; performance codes for enclosure systems; enclosure design for extreme operation environments. A project is required.
BLDG 6661 Hydrothermal Performance of the Building Envelope (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 6611 previously or concurrently.
Modelling of dynamic building envelope thermal performance. Thermal bridges. Modelling of transient moisture transfer, condensation and accumulation. Advanced glazings and evaluation of window performance. Active building envelope components for heat and moisture control. Experimental techniques for performance evaluation of the building envelope; infrared thermography, guarded hot box and calibrated hot box tests. A project is required.
BLDG 6671 Diagnostics and Rehabilitation of Building Envelope (4 credits)
Failures in building envelopes. Modes of deterioration including freeze-thaw, chemical, movements. Diagnostics and investigation techniques including field survey instruments. Assessment of intervention magnitude and performance of proposed solutions. Codes, standards and regulations. Case studies.
BLDG 6701 Building Environment (4 credits)
Design criteria of indoor environment. Assessment of thermal comfort and sensation. Mathematical models of thermal comfort: predictive models and adaptive models. Prediction of thermal sensation using: computer simulation, and measurements with thermal comfort meter. Verification of compliance with standards. Visual comfort. Standards for quality of visual environment. Calculation of photometric parameters. Preliminary design of the indoor lighting system. Evaluation of illuminance level using commercially available software packages. Acoustical comfort. Standards for quality of acoustical environment. Sound control measures through the design of buildings and HVAC systems. Two projects.
BLDG 6711 Mechanical Systems in Building (4 credits)
Co-requisite: BLDG 6701.
HVAC Systems. Analysis, selection and operation; design of air and water distribution systems in buildings; waste water disposal and sprinkler systems. A project is required.
BLDG 6721 Building Acoustics (*) (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent).
An understanding of sound and an examination of the major factors which contribute to a controlled acoustic environment in buildings. Topics covered include: basic vibration, sources, measurement and description of environmental noise, psychological and physiological aspects of sound perception; sound transmission through building elements; reverberation, measurement and control; and room acoustics. Case studies and a project are required.
BLDG 6731 Building Illumination (*) (4 credits)
Quantitative and qualitative aspects of illumination systems. Photometric quantities, visual perception and colour theory, standards, daylight and artificial illumination systems, radiative transfer. Fixture and lamp characteristics, control devices for improved energy efficiency. Design of advanced fenestration systems for daylighting. Field measurements and artificial sky tests. Virtual reality and other computer simulation techniques for lighting. A project is required.
BLDG 6741 HVAC Control Systems (4 credits)
HVAC control loops: classification and structure, specifications, hardware, tuning and testing. Optimization of single- and multi-loop control systems. Energy management systems for monitoring, control and diagnostics of HVAC system operation. A project is required.
BLDG 6751 Indoor Air Quality and Ventilation (*) (4 credits)
History and development of indoor air science. Relevant national and provincial standards and regulations. Principles of occupational hygiene; identification, evaluation and control of physical, biological, and chemical agents in indoor environment. Ventilation requirements. Definition of ventilation efficiency and removal effectiveness; measurement techniques and modelling. Indoor air monitoring; field studies of gases, fumes, solvents, and dusts. Plan for building walkthrough evaluations; strategies for improving indoor air quality. Building design for acceptable indoor air quality, material selection and specification. A case study or project.
BLDG 6761 Intelligent Buildings (4 credits)
Issues related to the Intelligent Building; automation, communication and security. Mechanical, electrical, electronic subsystems and their integration within the building; configuration and operational characteristics; performance specifications; analytical models; design methods; case studies. A project is required.
BLDG 6781 Energy Management in Buildings (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 6611 previously or concurrently.
Energy-related standards, codes and by-laws. Methods of assessment of the actual energy performance. Conventional and innovative measurement and analysis techniques. Energy-oriented renovation or replacement of building sub-systems (e.g. HVAC and lighting systems). Prediction of energy and cost savings using commercially available software packages. Verification of compliance with standards. Life cycle analysis. A case study and project.
BLDG 6791 Thermal Building Simulation (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 6611.
Mathematical models of heat and mass transfer phenomena through building components: transfer function methods and numerical methods. Models of radiative and convective heat transfer phenomena within buildings. Application to equipment-based modelling of HVAC systems: first principle models and correlation-based models. System-based modelling of HVAC systems. Validation of computer models. A project is required.
BLDG 6801 Construction Planning and Control (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 6571.
Methods of delivering construction. Contractual relationships and organizational structures. Phases of project development. Estimating resource requirements; costs and durations. Bidding strategies. Network analysis using CPM and PERT, time-cost trade-off, resource allocation. Cash flow analysis. Earned-value concept for integrated time and cost control. Quality control. Value engineering. A case study and project.
Note: Students who have taken the undergraduate equivalent BCEE 465 may not take this course for credit.
BLDG 6811 Labour and Industrial Relations in Construction (*) (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent).
The study of labour legislation with special emphasis on the construction industry, union organization, the theory and practice of negotiations, mediation, contract administration and arbitration. Review of actual contracts, discussion of future trends. Case studies.
BLDG 6821 Legal Issues in Construction (*) (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent).
Legal concepts and processes applicable to the development of constructed facilities and to the operation of the construction firm. Emphasis on Quebec law and institutions. Case studies.
BLDG 6831 Construction Processes (*) (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent).
A study of current construction methods and techniques. The subjects include wood framing, masonry, concrete forming, slipforming, precast construction, industrialized building, deep excavation shoring and underpinning. The methods are described in terms of materials involved, equipment required, current field practice and safety considerations. Case studies.
BLDG 6851 Project Cost Estimating (*) (4 credits)
Techniques and procedures used for estimating cost of construction projects. Topics include: cost estimation process; elements of project cost; conceptual and detailed cost estimation methods; risk assessment and range estimating; case studies; computer-aided estimating. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken the undergraduate equivalent BCEE 464 may not take this course for credit.
BLDG 6861 Simulations and Design of Construction Operations (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 6831.
Principles of modelling and simulation. Classification and validation of simulation models. Analysis of input data and outputs. Object Oriented Simulation (OOS). Simulation languages. Application of discrete event simulation in construction operations including earthmoving operations, building construction operations, and tunneling operations. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken the undergraduate equivalent BCEE 466 may not take this course for credit.
BLDG 691 Topics in Building Engineering I (4 credits)
Note: Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for these courses, providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. CIVI 691A, CIVI 691B, etc.
BLDG 6921 Trenchless Technology for Rehabilitation Works (4 credits)
State of Canadian urban infrastructure with a focus on underground facilities; current industry practice; common types of defects in underground pipes; diagnostics of defects and evaluation techniques for the conditions of water and sewer mains; planning, equipment, materials and methods for rehabilitation of water and sewer mains; case studies.
Note: Students who have taken ENGR 6721 may not take this course for credit.
BLDG 6931 Infrastructure Rehabilitation (4 credits)
State of Canadian urban infrastructure. Rehabilitation techniques as applicable to steel and concrete structures; degradation mechanisms; detection and classification of defects. Evaluation and assessment of the conditions of buildings and bridges. Rehabilitation materials and methods. Codes and guidelines. Case studies.
Note: Students who have taken ENGR 6731 may not take this course for credit.
BLDG 6951 Solar Building Modelling and Design (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 6611 or permission of instructor.
Design principles of solar buildings, including direct gain, indirect gain and solaria. Net-zero energy solar buildings; analytical and numerical models. Performance of glazing systems, transparent insulation, and airflow windows. Building-integrated photovoltaic systems. Thermal storage sizing for solar energy storage; phase-change thermal storage. Thermosyphon collectors. Prevention of overheating, shading systems and natural ventilation. A project is required.
BLDG 7401 Dispersion of Building Exhaust (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 6611.
Atmospheric parameters, wind velocity profiles, meteorological data. Gaussian dispersion equations. Plume rise and trajectories. Evaluation of stack gas plume dispersion. Trapped plumes; Turner’s approximation. Potential reingestion of building exhaust. Analytical, numerical and experimental modelling of dispersion process; design guidelines fumigation. A case study or a project is required.
BLDG 7511 Integrated Building Design (4 credits)
Prerequisites: BLDG 6601 and BLDG 6711.
Compatibility among building subsystems (structural, envelope, mechanical, lighting, materials) and between the building and the environment. Integration issues in the design, production and operation of the built facility. Case studies of failures caused by lack of compatibility. Consideration for tolerances and sustainable development. A project is required.
BLDG 7521 Advanced Computer-Aided Building Design (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 6231.
Characteristics of the building design process. Traditional versus emerging roles of computers pertaining to building design activities. Preliminary design and integrated design issues: analysis with incomplete/imprecise data, automatic sizing and checking based on Standards, interfaces between CAD and analysis routines, communications across disciplines and through design stages, standardization. Applications involving operations research techniques, KBS and analysis packages for engineering performance evaluation. A project is required.
BLDG 7601 Durability of Building Materials (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 6611 or equivalent.
Concepts underlying long-term performance of building materials such as: ceramics, stucco and synthetic stucco, lightweight concrete, wood and wood-based products, thermal insulation, selected composite materials, sealants, membranes used for waterproofing and air barriers. Methods of fabrication, properties and evaluation for durability. Failure mechanisms under combined actions of mechanical and environmental loads (temperature, moisture, freeze-thaw, solar radiation, salt solutions, air pollution, and microorganisms). A case study and project.
BLDG 7811 Project Acquisition and Control (4 credits)
Prerequisites: BLDG 6571, 6801.
Study of techniques and procedures used for construction project procurement and control. Topics treated include: marketing, bidding strategies, work break-down structure and contract packages, techniques for integrated time and cost control; management information systems for control, procurement; productivity measurement, contingency and escalation analysis and control. A project is required.
BLDG 7831 Building Economics II (4 credits)
Prerequisites: BLDG 6561, 6581.
Topics include: replacement analysis; risk analysis of projects; sensitivity analysis; forecasting techniques, profitability analysis; multi-attributed decision analysis, case studies. A project is required.
BLDG 7841 Information Technology Applications in Construction (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 7811.
Use of computers in estimating, cost engineering, scheduling and resource analyses, materials control, report generation and operations simulation. Information systems: information-based theories of management; information technology, cost and value information; analysis, design and implementation of a network based control system. Considerations for computer usage in construction firms; hardware, software, operations, economic, human and organizational. Product and process modelling; Internet use in product delivery. A project is required.
BLDG 7861 Business Practices in Construction (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 6801.
A study of business practices as they relate to the construction industry. Topics treated include: organization; marketing; bid preparation; bonding; personnel management; financing; accounting; cash-flow analysis; capital budgeting. The principles are first presented and then followed by case studies. A project is required.
BLDG 7871 Construction Equipment Management (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 6561.
The study of various classes of equipment, (cranes, excavators, loaders, tractors, etc.) used in construction. Methods are developed for selecting, acquiring, maintaining and replacing equipment. Treatment of simulation and its use for the optimal selection of equipment spreads. A project is required.
BLDG 791 Topics in Building Engineering II (4 credits)
Note: Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for these courses, providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. CIVI 691A, CIVI 691B, etc.
BLDG 8011 Doctoral Seminar in Building Engineering (***)
Grading on a pass/fail basis only. No credit value.
Civil Engineering
CIVI 6001 Advanced Reinforced Concrete (4 credits)
Strength limits; modes of failure; flexural and inclined cracking strength; crack propagation; crack width; deformation; biaxial and multiaxial strength of concrete; ultimate strength in flexure; ultimate strength in diagonal splitting; ultimate strength of columns; current research progress and modelling for finite element analysis; new code regulations. A project is required.
CIVI 6011 Pre-cast and Pre-stressed Concrete Structures (4 credits)
Prefabrication and prestressing concepts; segmental and modular structures and connections; composite and pre-and post-tensioned structures; analysis and design of determinate and indeterminate systems; design codes. A project is required.
CIVI 6021 Durability of Concrete Materials (4 credits)
Influence of constituent materials (cements, aggregates and admixtures) on the properties of fresh and hardened concrete. Chemistry and hydration reactions of cement and alternate cementing materials. Development of pore structure and its influence on transport and deterioration mechanisms, durability testing. Concrete mixture design and optimization for high performance and other speciality concrete types. Climatic loads affecting durability and performance. Performance vs. prescriptive specifications. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken ENGR 691B (Performance and Durability of Concrete Materials) may not take this course for credit.
CIVI 6031 Seismic Assessment and Retrofit of Structures (4 credits)
Seismic rehabilitation requirements and performance objectives. Evolution of codes, standards and regulations. Selection of retrofit design methodology. General strategies to develop rehabilitation schemes: add stiffness, damping, and/or mass reduction. Seismic assessment of existing steel structures. Behaviour and design of structures equipped with energy dissipation devices. Case studies and a project are required.
Note: Students who have taken CIVI 691B (Seismic Assessment and Retrofit of Structures) may not take this course for credit.
CIVI 6051 Design of Industrial Structures (4 credits)
Problems in the design of industrial structures in steel, reinforced concrete, masonry, and timber; rejuvenation and expansion of existing plant facilities; design of bracing systems, foundations, silos and liquid storage tanks; connections, standard details and codes. A case study and project.
CIVI 6061 Structural Health Monitoring (4 Credits)
Review of the current state of infrastructure including bridges, dams, pipelines as well as buildings. Components of civil infrastructure including smart and innovative structures. Structural Health Monitoring (SHM): principles, techniques, implementation, interdisciplinary approach, advantages and challenges. SHM systems: component and system design, sensors and instrumentation, data acquisition, data management, interpretation of SHM data, assessment of structural condition, and decision making. Damage detection methods: local and global, analytical and experimental, non-destructive evaluation, vibration based damage identification. Field applications. A project is required.
CIVI 6071 Advanced Steel Structures Design (4 credits)
Topics of this course include design principles of ductile building structures; fundamentals of stability theory, frame stability; concept, methods and applications of plastic analysis; design for local and global stability of braced frames, moment-resisting frames and structures equipped with passive supplemental damping systems: hysteretic, yielding and self-centring dampers; design strategies for enhanced seismic stability; computer applications. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for CIVI 691C (Advanced Steel Structures Design) may not take this course for credit.
CIVI 6101 Planning and Design of Bridges (4 credits)
History and development of bridges; basic parameters; material, system and geometry; selection of location and optimum proportioning of different structural types; selection and design of steel and concrete highway and railway bridge structures based on requirements of economics; maintenance, aesthetics and safety; modern trends in bridge design and construction; analysis of existing bridges; numerical examples. A project is required.
CIVI 6301 Hydrology (*) (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent).
Weather elements; precipitation, stage-discharge relations; evapo-transpiration; ground water flow, method of images; streamflow hydrograph, unit hydrograph and its applications, synthetic hydrographs; laminar flow; hydrologic routing; instantaneous hydrography; hydraulic routing, method of characteristics, kinematic routing; statistical analysis, confidence intervals, stochastic generator, auto-regressive model; applications of hydrology. A case study and a project are required.
CIVI 6331 Hydraulic Engineering (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent).
Development of surface water resources; basic measurements in hydraulic engineering; storage reservoirs; practical problems; run-off characteristics of natural streams; control structures; economic analysis; energy dissipators; sediment transportation; transitions; elements of river engineering; navigation; control of floods. A case study and a project are required.
CIVI 6381 Hydraulic Structures (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent).
Design of storage dams; characteristics of spillways and other outlet works; design of control structures; principles and design of flow measuring structures; special topics. A project is required.
CIVI 6401 Transportation Systems Analysis (4 credits)
Aspects of probability and statistics as applied to transportation; network theory; system operations and safety management; applications of optimization and decision theory to selection of alternative systems and facility location; evaluation of traffic control devices; signal timing plans and management strategies. A project is required.
CIVI 6411 Urban Transportation Planning (*) (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent).
Forecasting future travel patterns; travel characteristics; systems approach to transportation planning process; land use data collection and demand analysis; trip generation; trip distribution; model and root assignment; transportation of commodities; environmental impact analysis. Computer modelling. A project is required.
CIVI 6441 Traffic Engineering (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent).
Analysis of existing traffic flow conditions; study of traffic characteristics; volume and speed surveys; capacity-performance relations for urban streets and intersections; signal timing and coordination; traffic and environmental management; computer applications in incident detection and control; analysis and management of safety. A project is required.
CIVI 6451 Pavement Design (4 credits)
Components of pavement systems; materials, tests and specifications; granular and treated bases, subgrade and drainage; earthwork and soil stabilization; mechanistic-empirical theory for pavements; damage accumulation; axle loads and stresses in pavements; design methods for flexible and rigid pavements of highways and airports; design of pavement overlays; economic requirements; design projects and computer applications. A project is required.
CIVI 6461 Pavement Management Systems (4 credits)
Topics include introduction to pavement systems; strategic, tactical and operational planning for sustainable pavements; preservation, rehabilitation, upgrading and expansion; pavement damage assessment; data collection; decision making; performance modelling; pavement deterioration; coordination and scheduling of interventions. A project is required.
CIVI 6481 Sustainable Management of Industrial Waste (4 credits)
Industrial ecology and sustainable engineering concepts, characterization and sources of industrial waste, toxicological and risk aspects of waste management; environmental impact, material flow analysis, energy balance and recovery, management of water and resources use, material minimization, storage, physical, chemical and biological transformations, recycling, reuse and disposal, life cycle assessment, regulations, ISO certification. A project is required.
CIVI 6491 Engineering Aspects of Site Remediation (4 credits)
Physico-chemical characteristics of subsurface; soil biology; introduction to subsurface transport of contaminants; site assessment techniques; bioremediation principles and techniques; physico-chemical remediation; thermal removal; in-situ and ex-situ groundwater techniques; natural attenuation; case studies; lab demonstrations. A project is required.
CIVI 6501 Foundation Engineering (4 credits)
Theoretical development of bearing capacity of shallow and deep foundations, settlement analyses, design of retaining walls, sheet piles, tiebacks and caissons, dynamic analyses of pile foundations, design of machine foundations, foundations on difficult soils, construction and performance of foundations, computer applications, case histories. A project is required.
CIVI 6511 Earth Structures and Slope Stability (4 credits)
Design and construction of earth and rockfill dams. Seepage problems, flow nets, seepage control, soil compaction and stabilization. Computer analysis of slope stability, factor of safety. Measures taken to limit and accommodate settlements. Case studies.
CIVI 6521 Soil Behaviour (4 credits)
Drained and undrained shear strength of soils, stress-strain relationships, two and three dimensional stress paths. Pore water pressure coefficients in saturated and partially saturated clays. One and three dimensional consolidation theories, design of sand drains, and applications. Special geotechnical problems. A project is required.
CIVI 6531 Soil Testing and Properties (4 credits)
Measurement and evaluation of soil consolidation, strength, and pore water pressure characteristics by means of consolidation, triaxial and direct shear tests. Application of test results to design and research problems. A project is required.
CIVI 6541 Reinforced Earth (4 credits)
Design of geotechnical structures reinforced with geotextiles and geogrids to improve their strength and deformation properties. Use of geonets and geomembranes to accelerate the drainage and consolidation of soil systems. Soil nailing and inclined piling to prevent downhill creep and slope failure. Analysis and design of stone columns used to support light structures and prevent instability due to soil liquefaction. A project is required.
CIVI 6601 Modelling in Building and Environmental Engineering (4 credits)
Continuous and discrete forms of conservation laws: mass, momentum and energy, numerical methods (finite differences, implicit and explicit schemes, finite elements). Transport of contaminants and moisture in buildings and contaminants in the environment. Modelling and measuring sources and sinks of pollutants. Computer applications to building and environmental engineering. A case study and project.
CIVI 6611 Environmental Engineering (4 credits)
Introduction to waste water treatment and control; stream pollution and control; ground water pollution; air pollution; acid rain, meteorological aspects. Noise pollution; hazardous waste disposal; solid waste management. A case study and a project are required.
CIVI 6621 Engineering Aspects of Biological Treatment of Water and Air (4 credits)
Introduction to aerobic/anaerobic microbial processes, design of aerobic and anaerobic systems for biological treatment of municipal, industrial and agricultural water and air pollution, design and modelling of activated sludge reactors, trickling filters, plug flow reactors, lagoons, nutrient removal, constructed wetlands, phytoremediation, biofilters, bioscrubbers, management of biosolids, lab demonstration. A case study and project.
CIVI 6631 Hazardous Material Management and Transportation (4 credits)
Characterization and sources of hazardous materials, accidental release of hazardous material, toxicological aspects of hazardous material; risk analysis, legal issues, management of hazardous material after catastrophic events, storage, treatments, recycling, reuse and exchange of hazardous materials, life cycle analysis, attenuation of accidental release of hazardous materials, transportation and environmental systems interface, transportation network, minimum-risk route models, determination of safe truck routes and management. A project is required.
CIVI 6641 Unit Operations in Environmental Engineering (4 credits)
Physical and chemical principles underlying coagulation, flocculation, sedimentation, sorption, reverse osmosis, electrodialysis, ion exchange and sludge dewatering. Design and scale-up equations for clarifiers, absorption columns, filters, centrifuges, electrodialysis stacks, air components and demineralization units, lab demonstration. A case study and a project are required.
CIVI 6651 Water Pollution and Control (4 credits)
Physical, chemical and biological characteristics of water, water quality standards, reaction kinetics and material balances, eutrophication. Containment of reactive contaminants. Natural purification processes in water system, adsorption, absorption; diffusion and dispersion, oxidation. Large-scale transport of contaminants, single and multiple source models; modelling of transport processes, computer simulation, introduction to groundwater pollution, sea-water intrusion. A case study and a project are required.
CIVI 6661 Environmental Impact Assessment (*) (4 credits)
Engineering activities and the environment; environmental ethics. Prediction and estimation, statistical analysis of impact on air, water, soil quality and biological, socio-economic, cultural environments. Water and air pollution law, solid and hazardous waste laws. Applications of GIS, Environmental inventories, assessment preparation and review. Federal and provincial laws and regulations on environmental assessment. Strategies for environmental compliance, resolution of environmental conflicts. Case studies and project.
CIVI 6671 Fate and Transport of Contaminants in the Environment (4 credits)
Physical and chemical properties of organic and inorganic contaminants, air-soil-water-cycle and contaminant interactions, adsorption/desorption models, soil components in contaminant transport, influence of groundwater composition, advective flow, diffusion transport, diffusion and dispersion coefficients, partition coefficients, mechanisms and modelling of contaminant transport in soil and groundwater, environmental fate of contaminants Case studies concerning landfills, greenhouse effects, soil and groundwater interactions, nuclear waste disposal. A project is required.
CIVI 6681 Environmental Nanotechnology (4 credits)
Topics include basic concepts of nanoscience and nanotechnology; characterization of nanomaterials; nanoscience and public policy aspects; nanoparticle transport and fate in the environment; nanohazard assessment and nanotoxicology; environmental engineering applications of nanotechnology: pollutants sensing, monitoring, control and remediation. A project is required.
CIVI 6691 Greenhouse Gases and Control (4 credits)
Topics include physiochemical characteristics of greenhouse gas (GHG) species; GHG emissions, inventories, quantification and management; international and regional standards, protocols, regulations and schemes; GHG information management systems; GHG reuse, recycling, and sequestration; GHG emissions modelling and control planning; available and emerging technologies for reducing GHG emissions. A project is required.
CIVI 6711 Asset Management for Sustainable Civil Infrastructure (4 credits)
Topics include fundamentals of the infrastructure asset management process; strategic planning, location of underground assets, condition assessment and performance indicators, deterioration models, and development of community driven levels of service; life-cycle analysis, integrated infrastructure modelling, optimized intervention plans and budget allocation, asset management software systems. A project is required.
CIVI 691 Topics in Civil Engineering I (4 credits)
Note: Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for these courses, providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number. e.g. CIVI 691A, CIVI 691B, etc.
CIVI 7001 Earthquake Engineering (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6581.
Earthquake ground motion characteristics; behaviour of buildings, bridges, etc., methods and principles of structural dynamics; inelastic action and concept of energy absorption; evaluation of damage; soil structure interaction problems; design methods and code requirements; current research. A project is required.
CIVI 7031 Dynamics of Foundations (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6581.
Principles of soil dynamics; dynamic loads, theory of vibrations and design considerations for foundations of different types; shallow foundations, deep foundations, massive machine bases; problems of soil-structure interaction. A project is required.
CIVI 7101 Theory and Design of Orthotropic Bridges (4 credits)
Prerequisite: CIVI 6101.
Natural and technical orthotropy; orthogonally stiffened plates; methods of bridge analysis and design; materials; specifications; analysis of existing orthotropic structures; numerical examples. A project is required.
CIVI 7111 Theory and Design of Modern Bridge Systems (4 credits)
Prerequisite: CIVI 6101.
Hybrid, post-stressed and composite plate girders and trusses; delta type girders; orthotropic, shell types and tubular bridges, cable-stayed and stiffened cable bridges; optimization of bridge systems; vibrations and damping capacity; aerodynamics and seismic stability; concept of safety; fatigue and carrying capacity; use of models; application of computers. A project is required.
CIVI 7121 Cable Stayed Bridges (4 credits)
Prerequisite: CIVI 6101.
Basic bridge systems; methods of structural analysis; aerodynamic stability; structural details; typical structures. A project is required.
CIVI 7311 Advanced Analysis of Groundwater Flow and Contamination (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENCS 6021.
Groundwater storage and supply; storage in confined aquifers; water table fluctuation; aquifers; steady groundwater hydraulics; aquifer tests and pumping. Groundwater flow equations; conservative and reactive contaminant transport of groundwater systems; analytical and numerical solutions of contaminant transport equations; flow and solute transport in fractured porous media; assessment of environmental impact of waste disposal operations, model implementation strategies. A project is required.
CIVI 7401 Design of Transportation Terminals (4 credits)
Prerequisites: CIVI 6401 or 6411.
Functions of transportation terminals; airports, seaports, public transit terminals; systems approach to passenger and freight terminal design; criteria for evaluating the inter-modal transfer process and user requirements. Simulation models and analytical techniques for quality of service analysis and evaluation of terminal configurations; requirements of new systems; high capacity aircraft; V/STOL aircraft, LRT and HST systems. A project is required.
CIVI 7901 Environmental Engineering Research Project (9 Credits)
Prerequisite: Completion of at least 20 credits in the Environmental Engineering program and permission of the Departmental Graduate Program Director.
This is a research project to be completed under the supervision of a full-time faculty member from the Department. The research topic must be in the field of environmental engineering, and should be selected in consultation and with the approval of a faculty supervisor. The course is graded on the basis of the student’s performance during the work period, which includes a technical report that is assessed by two faculty members in the area.
CIVI 791 Topics in Civil Engineering II (4 credits)
Note: Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for these courses, providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number. e.g. CIVI 691A, CIVI 691B, etc.
CIVI 8011 Doctoral Seminar in Civil Engineering (***)
Grading on a pass/fail basis only. No credit value.
Chemical and Materials Engineering
CHME 6001 Project in Chemical and Materials Engineering (1 credit)
The course consists of an individual project in a chosen area of study in the area of Chemical and Materials Engineering under the supervision of a faculty member. This course may be repeated for credit.
CHME 6011 Advanced Transport Phenomena (4 credits)
Topics include equations of heat, mass, and momentum transfer; viscosity, thermal conductivity and diffusivity in laminar and turbulent conditions; velocity, temperature, and concentration distributions in selected systems; Navier-Stokes equations: direct simulation and turbulence modelling – Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS); turbulence near surfaces and interphase transport; multicomponent mass transfer; transport in porous media; effects of narrow pore size; and the dusty-gas model (DGM). A project is required.
CHME 6021 Advanced Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics (4 credits)
Topics include principles, concepts, and laws/postulates of classical and statistical thermodynamics and their link to applications that require quantitative knowledge of thermodynamic properties from a macroscopic to a molecular level; basic postulates of classical thermodynamics and their application; criteria of stability and equilibria; constitutive property models of pure materials and mixtures, including molecular-level effects using statistical mechanics; equations of state; phase and chemical equilibria of multicomponent systems; and thermodynamics of polymers. Applications are emphasized through extensive problem work relating to practical cases. A project is required.
CHME 6031 Chemical Kinetics and Reaction Engineering (4 credits)
CHME 6041 Chemical Engineering Process Dynamics and Control (4 credits)
Topics include principles of process dynamics and control; step response curves; PID control; strategies for chemical process control; process model identification; dynamic chemical process simulation; model-predictive control algorithms; and assessment of controller performance. A project is required.
CHME 6051 Chemical Process Engineering and Design (4 credits)
Topics include a review of the concepts of industrial chemical process design, engineering economics, process optimization, process simulation and plant safety; the use of fundamental knowledge in science and mathematics to design practical chemical engineering facilities. Special emphasis is placed on safety, hazards, sustainability and loss prevention issues in chemical plants. A project is required.
CHME 6061 Advanced Biochemical Engineering (4 credits)
Topics include the interaction of chemical engineering, biochemistry, and microbiology; mathematical representations of microbial systems. Kinetics of growth, death, and metabolism are also covered, as well as studies of continuous fermentation, agitation, mass transfer, and scale-up in fermentation systems, and enzyme technology. A project is required.
CHME 6071 Materials Science and Engineering (4 credits)
Topics include structure, behaviour and properties of engineering materials – metals, ceramics, polymers and composites; effects of crystalline structure and imperfections; and methods of observing, measuring and interpreting properties of materials. A project is required.
CHME 6081 Advanced Separation Processes (4 credits)
Topics include a review of basic chemical and mechanical separations; multicomponent separations; membrane separations; adsorption; chromatographic separations; and ion exchange. A project is required.
CHME 6091 Statistics for Chemical Engineering (4 credits)
Topics include a review of basic statistics; hypothesis testing; multivariate statistics; linear and nonlinear regression; chemical process model calibration; and response surface methodology. A project is required.
CHME 6101 Advanced Battery Materials and Technologies (4 credits)
Topics include a review of the principles of batteries, fuel cells, and supercapacitors; electrodes and electrolytes; thermodynamics, reaction kinetics, transport phenomena, electrostatics and phase transformations of various energy storage materials, particularly lithium-ion batteries, supercapacitors, and fuel cells; and experimental methods to study key parameters of energy storage materials, focusing on a materials science approach. A project is required.
CHME 6111 Polymer Chemistry and Engineering (4 credits)
Topics include the advanced theory and industrial practice of polymers, polymer chemistry, and polymer reactor engineering. The course covers polymer chemistry and polymerization kinetics for various types of polymerization including condensation, free radical, cationic, anionic, and coordination polymerization; polymerization processes including bulk, solution, emulsion, dispersion, gas phase, and slurry processes; polymer reactor engineering, polymer materials structure and property characterization, and recent developments in the field are included. A project is required.
CHME 6121 Nanomaterials Science and Engineering (4 credits)
Topics include chemical and engineering aspects of nanomaterials. The course covers synthesis, characterization, properties, and applications of a variety of nanomaterials, with a focus on representative inorganic nanomaterials, as well as carbon nanomaterials such as fullerenes, carbon nanotubes, and graphene. A project is required.
CHME 6131 Advanced Colloid and Interface Science and Engineering (4 credits)
Topics include properties of colloids and surfactants; physical and chemical interactions between colloidal particles: attraction and repulsion; stability of colloidal dispersions; coagulation and flocculation; surface and interface tension - wettability; characterization methods of colloidal particles; the relation between interface energy and adsorption; adsorption of surfactants on interfaces; micelles; surfactants in nanotechnology; adsorption in porous media; and surface characterization methods. A project is required.
CHME 6911 Topics in Chemical Engineering I (4 credits)
Note: Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for these courses providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the title of the topic. A project is required.
CHME 7911 Topics in Chemical Engineering II (4 credits)
Note: Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for these courses providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the title of the topic. A project is required.
Electrical and Computer Engineering
COEN 6211 Biological Computing and Synthetic Biology (*) (4 credits)
Introduction to the cell and the genome. Foundations of synthetic biology and ethics. Synthetic genomes and metabolic engineering. Model organisms, such as E. coli bacteria, and synthetic cells: self-replicating cells man-made from cloned genes, a cellular membrane and the basic elements of RNA and protein synthesis. Designing computational devices for implementation in biological cells. Introduction to modelling and computer simulation of gene regulatory networks. Methods of building and testing gene regulatory networks within and without cells. Expanding functionality via inter-cellular signaling. Basic interfacing to electronic sensors and actuators. Landmark and interesting applications of synthetic biology in computer engineering and other disciplines. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for COEN 691A or BIOL 631B (Biological Computing and Synthetic Biology) may not take this course for credit.
COEN 6311 Software Engineering (4 credits)
Software life cycle, software requirements and requirement documentation. Software design: top-down and bottom-up approaches; design validation and design reviews. Software implementation, choice of a programming language and portability. Testing, debugging and verification. Design of test cases. Software documentation and its maintenance. Documentation tools and documentation portability, user interface design. A project is required.
COEN 6312 Model-Driven Software Engineering (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COEN 6311 or COMP 6471 or equivalent.
Model-Driven Architecture (MDA), domain-based system partitioning, Platform-Independent Modelling (PIM), Platform Specific Modelling (PSM), Unified Modelling Language (UML), static and dynamic modelling with UML, UML extension mechanisms, UML profiling, Object Constraint Language (OCL), model transformation, introduction to Query/View/Transformation standard, action specification (OAL), automatic system generation. A project is required.
COEN 6313 Programming on the Cloud (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COEN 6311.
Topics include definition(s) of principles of cloud-based problem solving and programming; autonomy of cloud computing, service and business models, data centres and virtualization; CAP theorem, REST API and data models; MapReduce and programming model, distributed file systems for computer clusters, development environments and tools on clouds; cloud-based access and query; cloud application design principles; applications of cloud service concepts to the  design of a real-world Internet service. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken COEN 691 (Programming on the Cloud) may not take this course for credit.
COEN 6321 Applied Evolutionary and Learning Algorithms (*) (4 credits)
Topics include heuristic learning algorithms applied to real-world problems of design, classification, prediction and abstraction. Genetic algorithms, genetic programming, evolutionary strategies, generative and developmental systems, artificial life approaches, swarm intelligence, self-modifying programs, tabu search, simulated annealing and support vector machines; introduction to deep learning architectures. Examples of practical applications and challenges focused on biological and biomedical engineering. A project is required.
COEN 6331 Neural Networks (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6131.
Fundamentals of artificial neural networks; rigorous analysis of and introduction to various network paradigms: perceptrons, backpropagation, counter-propagation, Hopfield nets, bi-directional associative memories, adaptive resonance theory, cognitron and neocognitron; neural network topologies, memories, learning, stability and convergence; applications to adaptive knowledge, knowledge processing, classification, pattern recognition, signal processing, communications, robotics and control; and assessment of current neural network technology. A project is required.
COEN 6341 Embedded System Modelling (4 credits)
Fundamental issues and state-of-the-art methods, tools and techniques for system-level design of heterogeneous multi-core embedded systems. Modelling at different levels, from abstract specification down to implementation across hardware-software boundaries. Embedded system specification using system-level design languages, SystemC and SpecC. Application modelling and analysis. Embedded multi-core platforms. Transaction-level platform modelling. Processor and RTOS modelling. Communication architecture modelling. A project is required.
COEN 6501 Digital System Design and Synthesis (4 credits)
This course introduces students to VHDL language and modelling digital circuit with VHDL. Topics include: arithmetic and logic circuits. Storage devices. Finite State Machines. Algorithmic State Machines. Timing issues. Asynchronous Design. VHDL and modelling with VHDL. Synthesis and architectural models for synthesis. Project involving system design and modelling. A project is required.
COEN 6511 VLSI Circuit Design (4 credits)
Physical design of digital circuits using technologies of Very Large Scale Integration. CMOS and BiCMOS logic blocks. CMOS processing technology, design rules, CAD issues, and limitation of CMOS technologies. Physical layouts and parasitic elements of CMOS circuits. Characterization and performance evaluation. Electrical simulation using HSPICE. Design and implementation of CMOS logic structures, interconnects, and I/O structures, emphasis on optimizing operation speed and/or power dissipation/distribution. Project of circuit design using a specified CMOS technology. A project is required.
COEN 6521 Design for Testability (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COEN 6501 or COEN 6511.
Stuck-at faults, observability, controllability, fault coverage, test vectors, automatic test pattern generation (ATPG), statistical fault analysis, ad-hoc testing, level sensitive scan design (LSSD), serial scan, parallel scan, signature analysis and BILBO, boundary scan, built-in-self-test (BIST), IDDQ testing. A project is required.
COEN 6531 ASIC Synthesis (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COEN 6501 or COEN 6511.
Introduction to high level synthesis; synthesis models. The synthesis process; High Level Description Languages; scheduling; chaining and pipelining; clock optimization and synthesis; I/O synthesis. Behavioral synthesis; architectural trade-offs in power, area and delay. Design flow with FPGAs; design flow with full-custom and semi-custom ASIC’s. A project is required.
COEN 6541 Functional Hardware Verification (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COEN 6501 or equivalent.
Review of hardware design languages. Definition of functional verification. Design for verification. Writing testbenches, simulation engines, and coverage metrics. Introduction to verification languages. Verification plan: strategies, testcases, testbenches. Modelling verification environments. Modelling input relations, intervals, events. Introduction to formal verification tools. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for COEN 691X (Hardware Functional Verification) may not take this course for credit.
COEN 6551 Formal Hardware Verification (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COEN 6501.
Design verification technology. Introduction to mathematical logic (propositional, first-order, higher-order). Formal methods. Formal specification and validation. Combinational equivalence checking. Binary decision diagrams: BDD, automata theory, sequential equivalence checking, model theory, temporal logics, model checking, proof theory, predicate logic, theorem proving, formal verification CAD tools. Practical case studies. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for COEN 7501 (Hardware Formal Verification) may not take this course for credit.
COEN 6611 Real-time Systems (4 credits)
Taxonomy of real-time systems; Scheduling algorithms for static and dynamic tasks; Fault-tolerance and reliability; Resource and resource access control; Multiprocessor scheduling, resource access control, and synchronization; Real-time communication, Case studies in distributed real-time systems (e.g., HARTS, MARS, Spring, etc.). A project is required.
COEN 6711 Microprocessors and Their Applications (4 credits)
Introduction to microprocessors and their architectures. Examples of various microprocessors. Bus and I/O Organizations. Addressing modes. Timing. Software related issues. Memory and its hierarchy. Static and dynamic memory interfacing. Synchronous and asynchronous interfacing. Interrupts. DMA. Use of Co-processors. Single chip Micro-controllers. Examples of microprocessor applications at the system level. A project is required.
COEN 6721 Fault-Tolerant Distributed Systems (4 credits)
Fundamentals of the design and analysis of fault-tolerant systems, Models for distributed systems, Fault/error models, Techniques for providing hardware/software redundancy, Fault-detection in multi-processors, Stable storage, Recovery strategies for multi-processors (checkpointing), System diagnosis, Software design faults, Experimental validation techniques, Case studies in fault-tolerant distributed systems. A project is required.
COEN 6741 Computer Architecture and Design (4 credits)
Review of basic computer architecture designs. Fundamentals of computer design and performance. Cost issues. Instruction set design principles. Memory hierarchies: registers, caches and virtual memories. Basic processor implementation issues. High performance computing issues such as pipelining, superscalar and vector processing. Input/output subsystem designs. A project is required.
COEN 691 Topics In Computer Engineering I (4 credits)
Note: Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for these courses, providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. COEN 691A, COEN 691B, etc.
COEN 7311 Protocol Design and Validation (4 credits)
Prerequisites: COEN 6311 and ELEC 6851 or COMP 6461.
OSI model, introduction to seven layers, protocols, services. Protocol modelling techniques: FSM models, Petri net models, Hybrid models. Temporal logic. Protocol specification languages of ISO: Estelle model and language. Lotos model and language. Protocol implementation and techniques from formal specification to implementation. Protocol verification techniques: communicating FSM, reachability analysis, verification using checking, protocol design validation. Protocol performance: performance parameters, performance measurement by simulation, extensions to Estelle. Protocol testing: test architectures, test sequences, test sequence languages, test design methodology. A project is required.
COEN 7741 Advanced Computer Architecture (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COEN 6741.
Multiprocessing, Parallel processing, Vector processing, MIMD, SIMD, ILP (Instruction Level Parallelism), Superscalar, VLIW, Multithreading, Systolic processors, etc. A project is required.
COEN 791 Topics In Computer Engineering II (4 credits)
Note: Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for these courses, providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. COEN 791A, COEN 791B, etc.
ELEC 6041 Large-scale Control Systems (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6131 or equivalent.
Introduction to large-scale systems and applications. Model-order reduction and minimal realization. Centralized and decentralized fixed modes (CDMs and DEMs). Characterization and computation of DEMs and approximate DEMs. Structured and unstructured DEMs. Quotient fixed modes and stabilizability of decentralized systems by means of linear time-varying control law. Effects of sampling on decentralized control systems. Centralized and decentralized robust servomechanism problem. Decentralized controller design using pole assignment technique and optimization method. A project is required.
ELEC 6051 Introduction to Analog VLSI (4 credits)
Challenges of IC techniques and of VLSI, BJT and MOS processes. Passive components; network models and simulations. Layout design rules and CAD packages. Switch, active resistor, current mirror and voltage references; differential amplifiers, comparators, operational amplifiers, transinductance amplifiers, voltage to current transducers. Noise considerations. Offset and precision techniques. Applications: RF amplifiers, filters, oscillators, current mode IC networks. A project is required.
ELEC 6061 Real-time Computer Control Systems (4 credits)
Introduction to real-time computer control systems; a review of discrete-time signals and systems, difference equations, z-transform; sampled data systems, sample and hold, discrete models; discrete equivalents of continuous-time systems; stability analysis; design specifications; design using root locus and frequency response methods; implementation issues including bumpless transfer, integral windup, sample rate selection, pre-filtering, quantization effects and computational delay; scheduling theory and priority assignment to control processes, timing of control loops, effects of missed deadlines; principles and characteristics of sensors and devices, embedded processors, processor/device interface. A project is required.
ELEC 6071 Mixed-Signal VLSI for Communication Systems (*) (4 credits)
Topics include overview of wireline communication links, mechanisms of signal degradation, modulation formats, TX/RX synchronization options, IC technology limitations, transmitter front-end circuits, receiver front-end circuits, decision circuits, clock and data recovery systems, phase-locked loops, jitter, continuous-time and discrete-time equalizers, system metrics. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for ELEC 691N (Mixed-Signal VLSI for Communication Systems) may not take this course for credit.
ELEC 6081 Modern Analog Filter Design (4 credits)
Review of network analysis. Magnitude and frequency scaling. Magnitude and phase approximation in synthesis of filter functions. Second order active RC filters. Synthesis of all-pole LC ladder filters. Second order switched capacitor filters. Integrated circuit filters. A project is required.
ELEC 6091 Discrete Event Systems (4 credits)
Introduction to discrete-event systems (DES). Modelling (languages, automata and Petri nets). Supervisory control (controllability, modular control and control under partial observation). Architecture (decentralized and hierarchical schemes). Petri nets (modelling and analysis). Timed models. A project is required.
ELEC 6111 Detection and Estimation Theory (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENCS 6161.
Basic hypothesis testing, cost functions, Bayes and Neyman Pearson tests, the power of a test, sequential tests; estimation, Bayes estimates, maximum a posteriori estimates; the Cramer-Rao inequality, maximum likelihood estimates; composite hypothesis testing, application of estimation theory to phase locked loops, vector representation of signals in noise, application of the Kharhunen-Loeve expansion, complex analytic representation of signals; detection and estimation of signals in white and non-white noise, the matched filter, composite hypothesis testing, random amplitude and phase, multi-path channels, waveform estimation, Wiener filters, Kalman filters. A project is required.
ELEC 6131 Error Detecting and Correcting Codes (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENCS 6161 or ELEC 6831.
Introduction to abstract algebra; linear block codes: cyclic, BCH, and Reed-Solomon codes; convolutional codes; TCM codes; introduction to iterative based codes; turbo codes, LDPC codes; trade-offs between power, bandwidth, data rate and system reliability. A project is required.
ELEC 6141 Wireless Communications (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6831.
Topics include wireless radio link analysis; receiver sensitivity and receiver noise sources; path loss, shadowing, and fading models; area coverage and range calculation; introduction to cellular systems: frequency reuse, trunking and grade of service, sectoring and cell splitting, coverage and capacity. Modulation techniques for mobile communications, spread-spectrum techniques; multiplexing and multiple access techniques; wireless standards from first generation to fourth generation; OFDM: an architecture for the fourth generation. A project is required.
ELEC 6151 Information Theory and Source Coding (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENCS 6161.
Entropy of a source, rate distortion functions, source coding, analog to digital conversion, effects of sampling and quantization, vector quantization, discrete memoryless channels and their capacity, cost functions, channel coding theorem, channel capacity, fundamental concepts of information theory with applications to digital communications, theory of data compression, broadcast channels, application to encryption, DES, public key encryption, computational complexity. A project is required.
ELEC 6171 Modelling and Analysis of Telecommunications Networks (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENCS 6161.
Application of queuing theory to the analysis of the performance of telecommunication systems; Poisson arrival process and its properties; Birth-death processes applied to queuing, service distributions; performance measures of a queuing systems; examples of queuing systems in equilibrium; finite and infinite server and population models; Erlang blocking formulae; method of stages.; Networks of queues; product-form solution for open and closed queuing networks; computational algorithms for queuing networks; the imbedded Markov chain technique applied to queues with general service distribution, analysis of multiple access techniques, TDMA, FDMA, polling, CDMA, ALOHA and CSMA. A project is required.
ELEC 6181 Real-time and Multimedia Communication over Internet (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6851.
Review of Internet architecture and protocols. Network impairments: jitter and delay. RTP: transport protocols for real-time data. Packet scheduling, QoS in the Internet: differentiated services, integrated services, Resource reservation protocol (RSVP), Multi protocol label switching (MPLS). Voice/Fax/Video over IP. Internet-to-PSTN. Protocols and standards - H.323, Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) and Media Gateway Control Protocol (MGCP). Internet telephony signaling. Interoperability issues. A project is required.
ELEC 6221 Solid State Devices (*) (4 credits)
Junction theory (PN junctions, Schottky and ohmic contacts, heterojunctions). Structures and characteristics of diodes, solar cells, bipolar transistors, and fundamentals of MOSFETs. Planar silicon junctions and transistors will be designed, fabricated and evaluated in the laboratory, including resistivity measurements, semiconductor cleaning, oxidation, diffusion, photolithography, etching, metallization, and the comparison of design with experimental results. A project is required.
ELEC 6231 Design of Integrated Circuit Components (*) (4 credits)
The structure, characteristics, and design of MOS capacitors and MOSFETs, FinFETs, SOI FETs, velocity-modulation transistors, and HFETs. Role of strain in operation of modern FETs. Planar MOS devices, including capacitors and MOSFETs will be designed, fabricated and evaluated in the laboratory. A project is required.
ELEC 6241 VLSI Process Technology (*) (4 credits)
Introduction to basic VLSI technologies; crystal growth, thermal oxidation, diffusion, ion implantation, chemical vapour deposition, wet and dry etching, and lithography. Layout, yield, and VLSI process integration. The lab demonstrates a semiconductor device fabrication process. A project is required.
ELEC 6251 Microtransducer Process Technology (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6231 or ELEC 6241.
Overview of micromachining process. Bulk-micromachined structures and devices. Anisotropic etching of silicon; phenomena, processes, geometry, crystal physics. Surface-micromachined structures, devices, processes. CMOS-compatible micromachining. Case-study examples. A project is required.
ELEC 6261 Optical Devices for High-Speed Communications (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6221 or equivalent.
Overview of optical properties of semiconductors. The fundamental principles for understanding and applying optical fiber technology, fundamental behaviour of the individual optical components and their interactions with other devices. Lasers, LED’s, optical fibers, light detectors, optical switches. Concepts and components of WDM and DWDM. A comprehensive treatment of the underlying physics such as noise and distortion in optical communications, light polarization, modulation and attenuation. A project is required.
ELEC 6271 Nanoscience and Nanotechnology: Opto-Electronic Devices (4 credits)
This course covers the fundamental principles of nanoscience and nanotechnology which include principles of quantum mechanics and quantum properties of solid state materials. Properties of metal and semiconducting nanoparticles and their synthesis; Carbon nanostructures and nanotubes; bulk nanostructured materials; Solid disordered nanostructures and nanostructured crystals; quantum wells, quantum wires, and quantum dots and their physical properties; preparation of quantum nanostructures, Introduction to NanoElectroMechanical Systems (NEMS), nanomachining and fabrication of nanodevices. A project is required.
ELEC 6281 Principles of Solid State Nanodevices (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6271 or equivalent.
Theoretical basis of nanodevices. Overview of fundamental quantum phenomena in semiconductors. Electronics in low-dimensional structures (two-dimensional electron gas, quantum wire and dots, electron scattering, transport). High-speed electron devices based on quantum structures (nanoscale MOSFETs, high-electron-mobility transistors, resonant-tunneling diodes and transistors, superlattice-based transistors). Logic gates based on quantum devices. Quantum optoelectronics (optical transitions in quantum structures, quantum well, quantum dots photodetectors and lasers, quantum cascade lasers). Single electron devices. Carbon nanotube transistors, molecular electronics and spintronics. Nanodevice technology and characterization. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for ELEC 691X (Principles of Solid State Nanodevices) may not take this course for credit.
ELEC 6301 Advanced Electromagnetics (4 credits)
Maxwell's equations and boundary conditions. Theorems: uniqueness, reciprocity, surface and volume equivalence. Vector potentials and solution of the homogeneous and inhomogeneous wave equations. Waveguides and scattering formulations in rectangular and cylindrical coordinates. Dielectric waveguides. Physical optics. Selected topics in integral and differential equations, ray-optical techniques, and computational methods. Applications to antennas and microwaves. A project is required.
ELEC 6311 Radiation and Scattering of Waves (4 credits)
Construction of Green’s functions. Canonical problems – waveguide, cylinder, wedge, dielectric slab. Sommerfeld integrals. Impedance boundary conditions. Surface and leaky waves. Asymptotics, method of steepest descent, method of stationary phase. High-frequency uniform asymptotic methods. Geometrical theory of diffraction. Edge diffraction, creeping waves. Applications to problems in antennas, computational electromagnetics, electromagnetic compatibility, propagation, and scattering. A project is required.
ELEC 6341 Antennas (*) (4 credits)
Antenna fundamentals and definitions. Radiation integrals. Dipoles and loops. Arrays. Antenna self and mutual inductance. Matching techniques. Travelling wave antennas. Broadband antennas. Equivalence principle. Aperture antennas. Numerical techniques. Antenna measurement techniques. A project is required.
ELEC 6351 Modern Antenna Theory (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6341.
Helmholtz equation, Green’s function, current element, the ideal dipole, radiation impedance, gain directivity, reciprocity, polarization. Half-wave dipole, antennas above ground, small loop antenna, arrays of antenna, array factor, pattern multiplication array synthesis, mutual impedance, aperture antenna. Hallens integral equation, Pocklingons equation, numerical solution by the method of weighted residuals, and by the moment method, wire grids. Magnetic field integral equation and solid surfaces. Aperture antennas, aperture integration, geometrical optics, physical optics. Geometrical theory of diffraction, wedge diffraction coefficients, applications, multiple diffraction and diffraction by curved surfaces. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for ELEC 7341 may not take this course for credit.
ELEC 6361 Acoustics (*) (4 credits)
Sound generation and propagation in elastic media; conversion between acoustical, electric and mechanical energy. Lumped-parameter approximations, sound in rooms, underwater acoustics, microphones; loudspeakers and audio communications problems; noise and vibration control problems. A project is required.
ELEC 6371 Design of Wireless RF Systems (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6391.
Introduction to wireless systems. Noise and distortion in microwave systems. Antennas and propagation. Amplifiers. Mixers. Transistor oscillators and frequency synthesizers. Modulation techniques. Receiver design. Use of RF CAD tools. A project is required.
ELEC 6381 Techniques in Electromagnetic Compatibility (4 credits)
Introduction to EMC procedures, control plans and specifications. Radiated and conducted susceptibility and emission testing. Introduction EMC antennas, antenna concepts, electric and magnetic dipoles, biconical dipoles, conical log spiral antennas, setting up fields for susceptibility testing, measuring radiation from equipment. Coupled transmission lines, pulse propagation, closely spaced parallel transmission lines, capacitive coupling, inductive coupling, shielding against magnetic fields. Shielding and enclosures, electric and magnetic field screening mechanisms, shielding effectiveness, grounding considerations. EMC test facilities, screened rooms, TEM cells. Signals and spectra, intermodulation, cross-modulation, the spectrum analyzer. Noise and pseudo-random noise, noise performance of measurement/receiving systems, noise equivalent bandwidth, noise figure, antenna noise temperature and S/N ratio. A project is required.
ELEC 6391 Microwave Engineering (*) (4 credits)
Properties of waveguides, striplines and microstrips. Scattering parameters. Butterworth and Chebyshev impedance transformers. Microwave couplers, cavities, and Fabry-Perot resonators. Periodic structures. Microwave filter design. Faraday rotation and non-reciprocal devices. A project is required.
ELEC 6411 Power Electronics I (*) (4 credits)
Introduction to power electronic systems. Semiconductor switches. Basic power converter configurations. Line commutated controlled and uncontrolled ac-dc rectifiers. Basic dc-dc converters. Pulse width modulation techniques. Basic dc-ac converters. Switching power supplies. Applications to industrial power supplies and motor drives. A project is required.
ELEC 6421 Renewable Energy Systems (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6411.
This course covers electrical basics and models of solar energy (photo-voltaics); electrical power from wind energy (including turbine operation); electrical power from wave and tidal energy; electrical power from micro-hydro and biomass waste to energy. Fundamental energy equations will be derived from physics and the electrical power equations developed. Engineering design implications will be discussed. Design assignments are given to reinforce the engineering design based on fundamental physics. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for ELEC 691Z (Renewable Energy Systems) may not take this course for credit.
ELEC 6431 Advanced Electrical Machines and Drives (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6471 or ELEC 6491.
Transient modelling of electrical machines. ABC, Park’s transform and d,q, two axis modelling of synchronous and induction machines. Application of the advanced models to machine transients, for example, direct on line starting or reclosing operation. Vector control of AC machines including permanent magnet machines. Differences between permanent magnet AC and brushless DC machines. Switched reluctance motor modelling and operation. Modelling of losses in machines. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for ELEC 691K may not take this course for credit.
ELEC 6461 Power Electronics II (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6411.
Circuits and operating principles of self commutated dc-dc and dc-ac converters. One and four quadrant dc-dc converters. Single-phase and three-phase voltage source and current source inverters. Pulse width modulation strategies. Resonant converters. Soft switching techniques. Isolated dc-dc converters. Application to switch-mode power supplies, uninterruptible power supplies and ac motor drives. A project is required.
ELEC 6471 Hybrid Electric Vehicle Power System Design and Control (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6411.
Introduction to Electric Vehicles (EV), Hybrid Electric Vehicles (HEV). Vehicle design fundamentals. Traction motors for EV/HEV propulsion. On-board energy sources and storage devices: high-voltage traction batteries, fuel cells, ultra-capacitors, flywheels. Power electronic converters and control. Various EV/HEV/Fuel Cell Vehicle topologies and modelling. Energy management strategies. Practical design considerations. Engineering impact of electric, hybrid electric, and fuel cell vehicles. A project is required.
ELEC 6481 Computer-Aided Analysis and Design of Electric Machines (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6411.
This course uses machine design software to aid in the analysis and design of electrical machines, which is offered in a computer-aided design (CAD) environment. The emphasis is on the design of electrical machines for renewable energy and electric vehicle applications. Emphasis is placed on permanent-magnet and switched reluctance machines, although machines of importance, like the induction machine, are also discussed. Magnetic equivalent circuits for a magnet and a typical machine radial field geometry are developed which lead naturally to sizing equations. Other geometries and Eddy current and hysteresis core loss models are presented. The torque angle curves of the switched reluctance machine are developed, which lead to design concepts. The synchronous reluctance machine is introduced. A project is required.
ELEC 6491 Controlled Electric Drives (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6411.
Elements of a drive system; characteristics of common mechanical systems; drive characteristics; operation in one, two or four quadrants. Fully controlled rectifier drives; braking of DC motors; control of DC motors using DC/DC converters. Control of polyphase induction motors; voltage-source and current source inverter drives; frequency-controlled induction motor drives; introduction to vector control of induction motor drives; field oriented control (FOC); sensor-less operation. Control of synchronous motors; permanent magnet motors. Switched reluctance motor (SRM) drives; stepper motors. Brush-less DC (BLDC) motor drives; low-power electronic motor drives. A project is required.
ELEC 6601 Digital Signal Processing (4 credits)
Discrete-time signals and systems, difference equation; the discrete Fourier series and transform; the Z-transform and LTI systems; sampling of continuous-time signals. Reconstruction of signals using interpolation, sampling of discrete-time signals, discrete-time decimation and interpolation, changing the sampling rate by integer and non-integer factor; multirate signal processing, polyphase decomposition, multirate filter banks; digital processing of analog signals, A/D and D/A converters; linear phase and non-linear phase systems, all-pass and minimum phase systems; recursive and non-recursive digital filters, common digital filter structures, common design approaches for digital filters; random signals; linear adaptive filters, Weiner and Least-Mean-Square filters. A project is required.
ELEC 6611 Digital Filters (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6601.
Approximation and design of recursive and non-recursive digital filters. Transformations. Stability. Digital filter structures including wave and lattice structures. Effect of quantization, noise and limit cycles. Hardware implementation. Digital filter applications. A project is required.
ELEC 6621 Digital Waveform Compression (4 credits)
Prerequisites: ELEC 6601; ENCS 6161.
Numerical representation of waveform information; common waveform communication systems; statistical models used for waveforms; visual psychophysics. Differential PCM, motion estimation/compensation for video compressions. Transform coding: run length coding, Huffman and arithmetic coding, control of Q factor and Q table, segmentation/contour/edge based coding; pre-processing and post-processing strategies. Vector quantization. Sub-band coding and Wavelet Transform. Zero trees. Channel concerns: robustness, error recovery, masking video/image bit rate source models. Coding of two-level graphics. Review of standards: JPEG, MPEG, H.261. A project is required.
ELEC 6631 Video Processing and Compression (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6601.
Topics include frequency analysis video signals, colour video models; TV and video capture and display, spatial-temporal basic operations, elementary visual features; vector matrix video notation; frequency response of human vision; theory of video sampling, video quality assessment; motion modelling and estimation; temporal frame prediction, video filtering, high-dynamic-range video; fundamentals of video compression, transform coding, predictive coding, recent video compression standards, digital TV, advanced topics. A project is required.
ELEC 6641 Two-dimensional Signal and Image Processing (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6601.
Two-dimensional signals and systems: linear system fundamentals, Fourier analysis of two-dimensional signals, discrete Fourier transform, two-dimensional FIR and IIR filter design and implementations. Image enhancement and restoration: smoothing and sharpening, noise reduction, order statistics filtering, inverse filtering, Wiener filtering, constrained least-square filtering. Wavelets and filter banks: multiresolution concept, perfect reconstruction, one- and two-dimensional wavelet transforms. Introduction to image compression: lossy and lossless compression, image compression standards. Introduction to image segmentation and edge detection. Color image processing: color image representation, color space conversion, pseudo and full color image processing. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken ELEC 7631 may not take this course for credit.
ELEC 6651 Adaptive Signal Processing (4 credits)
Prerequisites: ELEC 6601; ENCS 6161.
Optimal filtering; adaptive filter structures; linear prediction; lattice structures; Levinson recursion. The LMS-based algorithms; basic LMS and properties; mean-square error surface; stability and convergence behavior; normalized LMS; affine projection. Recursive least-square methods; method of least-squares; block least-squares methods. Frequency-domain and sub-band adaptive filters. Kalman filtering. Applications of adaptive filters. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken ELEC 7601 may not take this course for credit.
ELEC 6661 Medical Image Processing (*) (4 credits)
Topics include principles and techniques used in the processing and analysis of medical images; image quality metrics, denoising medical images, quantification, rigid and deformable registration; similarity metrics such as mutual information (MI); images from the most common medical imaging modalities (X-ray, CT, MRI and ultrasound) will be used. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken ELEC 691 (Medical Image Processing) may not take this course for credit.
ELEC 6671 Biological Signal Processing (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6601.
This course covers signal processing through discussion of current bioengineering activities which rely on signal processing and include assessment of neural function with simultaneous collection of electroencephalogram (EEG) and functional MRI data; the noninvasive assessment of cardiac autonomic regulation using electrocardiography; assessment of neural function using near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS); assessment of muscle activity using electromyography (EMG). Topics include modern spectral analysis, time-frequency analysis (short-time Fourier transforms and wavelets); signal modelling; multivariate analyses and adaptive filtering. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for ELEC 691 (Biological Signal Processing) may not take this course for credit.
ELEC 6831 Digital Communications (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6601.
Topics include random processes and linear systems; baseband modulation/demodulation, optimal receivers in AWGN, correlation and matched-filter receivers, pulse shaping for band-limited channels; bandpass modulation techniques such as PAM, PSK, DPSK, FSK, QAM; synchronization, timing and carrier recovery, maximum-likelihood carrier phase and symbol timing estimation; error control coding, linear block codes, syndrome-based decoding, system bit error rate and coding gain. A project is required.
ELEC 6841 Advanced Digital Communications (4 credits)
Prerequisites: ELEC 6831; ENCS 6161.
Digital signaling over band-limited channels: signal design for band-limited channels, maximum likelihood sequence detection, equalization techniques, e.g., zero-forcing, minimum mean squared error, adaptive equalization. Advanced coding and modulation: concatenated coding with iterative decoding, coded modulation techniques. Diversity techniques for fading channels. Synchronization techniques: carrier and timing recovery, frequency estimation techniques, frame and network synchronization, maximum-likelihood estimation and Cramer-Rao bounds. A project is required.
ELEC 6851 Telecommunications Networks (4 credits)
Communication Networks and Services; Introduction to Layered Network Architectures; Transmission systems and the Telephone Network: multiplexing circuit switching, routing and signaling; Peer-to-Peer Protocols: ARQ protocols, data link controls, packet multiplexing, Multiple Access Communications: Aloha, CSMA, reservation schemes, polling, token-passing ring, LAN standards, LAN Bridges; Packet-switching Networks: Datagrams and virtual circuits; TCP/IP Architecture: Internet protocol, transmission control protocol. A project is required.
ELEC 6861 Higher Layer Telecommunications Protocols (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6851.
Broadband communications: concept, issues, signaling techniques, examples. Multimedia communications: traffic characteristics, classes, issues (e.g. QOS) and architectures. Internetworking: issues, architectures (e.g. router, bridge, gateway), protocols and standards: ISO, IP and IPv6. Network Management: issues, architecture, management information base (MIBs), SNMP, TMN and CMIP. Advanced topics, such as policy approach for network management. A project is required.
ELEC 6871 Fiber-Optic Communication Systems and Networks (4 credits)
Overview of the basics of optical transmitters, optical receivers, optical fibers, optical amplifiers, and SDH/SONET. Design of optical fiber amplifiers: fiber Raman amplifiers and Erbium-doped fiber amplifiers (EDFA), theories, configurations, simulation, designs, applications, requirements for optical networks. Optical transmitters: characteristics and requirements for optical networks. Optical receivers: characteristics, requirements, noise analysis. Optical systems and performance: system architectures, design guidelines, long-haul systems, dispersion management. Coherent optical systems: ASK, FSK, DPSK, system performance. DWDM systems and networks: WAN and MAN system performance, TDM, subcarrier multiplexing, CDMA, WDM network design, network survivability. Optical solition systems: fiber solitions, loss-managed solitions, dispersion-managed solitions, impact of amplifier noise, high-speed solition system. Photonic packet switching: OTDM synchronization, header processing, burst switching. Access optical networks: architectures, PON. A project is required.
ELEC 6881 Fundamentals and Applications of MIMO Communications (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6141 or ELEC 6841.
Multiple Input Multiple Output (MIMO) communication systems and wireless channel models; Diversity techniques and array processing; MIMO channel capacity; Space-time black and trellis codes; Spatial multiplexing and layered space-time architectures, diversity-versus-multiplexing tradeoff; Differential and unitary space-time coding; MIMO OFDM and space-frequency coding; Concatenated coding and iterative decoding for MIMO systems; Applications of MIMO in wireless systems. A project is required.
ELEC 6891 Broadcast Signal Transmission (*) (4 credits)
This course covers signal definition, human eye limitations, pixel representation schemes, serial digital interface (SDI); image formats (1080i, 720i, 4k, 8k); compression schemes: H.264/265; modulation and coding techniques used in broadcasting. Terrestrial transmission standards such as DVB-T2, ATSC-3; satellite broadcasting standards such as DVB/S2; MPEG transport stream (MPEG-TS), program specific information (PSI), program ID (PID), program association tables (PAT), program map table (PMT), conditional access, program, program clock reference (PCR); multiplexing and IP encapsulation, single program transport stream (SPTS) and multiple program transport stream (MPTS); video storage and retrieval. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for ELEC 691DD (Transmission in Broadcast Signal) may not take this course for credit.
ELEC 691 Topics in Electrical Engineering I (4 credits)
See Note in Topic Area E02
ELEC 6961 Graduate Seminar in Electrical and Computer Engineering (1 credit)
Students must attend a set of seminars identified by the Department and submit a comprehensive report on topics presented in one of these seminars. The report, including an abstract, must be suitably documented and illustrated, should be at least 1000 words in length, must be typewritten on one side of 21.5 cm by 28 cm white paper of quality, and must be enclosed in binding. Students are referred to Form and Style: Thesis, Reports, Term Papers, fourth edition by Campbell and Ballou, published by Houghton Mifflin. Seminar: two hours per week.
ELEC 7151 Broadband Communications Networks (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6171.
Characterization of traffic sources, data, voice and video; ATM protocol architecture, ATM switching architectures, performance evaluation of the ATM multiplexer; Call admission control in ATM networks; Traffic management in ATM, TCP/IP over ATM and wireless ATM Fluid flow approximation, z-transform techniques, and blocking for multiclass flows. A project is required.
ELEC 7441 Design of Power Electronic Circuits (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6461.
Design driving factors. Characteristics of basic converter topologies, including resonant and soft switching circuits. Characteristics and limitations of power semiconductors as switching devices. Design considerations for gate drives, snubbers, power filters and protection circuits. Printed circuit board and thermal design. Application to the practical design of typical power converter systems. A project is required.
ELEC 7451 Power System Compensation (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6411.
Steady state and dynamic characteristics of transmission systems. Theory of line compensation and reactive power control; series and shunt passive compensation. Principles of operation of static compensators and basic configurations; series, shunt and shunt-series. Flexible ac transmission systems (FACTS). Line and self commutated controllers; configurations and control aspects. Applications to distribution systems. Performance evaluation and practical applications of static compensators. A project is required.
ELEC 791 Topics in Electrical Engineering II (4 credits)
See Note in Topic Area E02
ELEC 8011 Doctoral Seminar in Electrical Engineering (***)
Grading on a Pass/Fail basis only. No credit value.
Engineering and Computer Science
ENCS 5721 Composition and Argumentation for Engineers (3 credits)
Fundamentals of English composition and argumentation: grammar, reasoning and persuasion; persuasive proofs; argumentation; structuring and outlining: the problem statement; the body; and the conclusions. Language and persuasion for effective communication in professional engineering. Cultivation of a writing style firmly based on clear and critical thinking skills. Lectures: three hours per week.
Note: This course cannot be taken within the credit requirements of the program. Students who have taken ENCS 591A (Composition and Argumentation for Engineers) may not take this course for credit.
ENCS 6001 Elements of Engineering Mathematics (3 credits)
Functions of one variable, Taylor’s series expansion, review of differentiation, integration and solution of ordinary differential equations. Functions of several variables, partial derivatives, multiple integrals, introduction to partial differential equations, wave equation and diffusion equation. Matrix and vector analysis, characteristic value problems, orthogonal functions; introduction to statistics and numerical methods. Lectures: three hours per week.
ENCS 6021 Engineering Analysis (4 credits)
Sturm-Liouville problem; orthogonal functions; ordinary differential equations with variable coefficients and power series solutions; integral transforms; partial differential equations; boundary value problems; applications to engineering problems. A project is required.
ENCS 6031 Cultures of Engineering Practice (4 credits)
Topics include historical emergence of engineering throughout the world; cross-cultural dimensions of contemporary engineering practice; qualitative research methods for cultural analysis; technical communication across cultures. Case studies and a project are required.
ENCS 6041 Creativity, Innovation, and Critical Thinking (4 credits)
Explanations of innovative and creativity thinking; approaches to problem solving, psychology of invention; diffusion of innovation; leadership through critical thinking; design creativity; modern and historical examples of innovation; and cognitive approaches to scientific and technological thinking. A project is required.
ENCS 6042 Communication Techniques for the Innovation Process (4 credits)
This course introduces theories of client-centred design. Topics and skills covered include qualitative data collection, customer development communication, and user interview techniques. Students will have hands-on experience in customer validation, audience appropriate message creation, and advanced presentation techniques for the innovation process. A project is required.
ENCS 6043 Seminar in Innovation Process (1 credit)
Prerequisites or co-requisites: ENCS 6041 and ENCS 6042.
Registration is restricted to students enrolled in the Graduate Certificate in Innovation, Technology and Society.
The seminar integrates theoretical concepts in innovation and communication processes in preparation for projects in the certificate practicum.
ENCS 6044 Practicum in Innovation Process (6 credtis)
Prerequisites: ENCS 6041, 6042 and 6043.
Registration is restricted to students enrolled in the Graduate Certificate in Innovation, Technology and Society.
The practicum takes place in the Concordia District 3 Centre for Innovation and Entrepreneurship. Students develop innovation projects under the supervision of academic advisors and District 3 instructional personnel. This course is graded on a pass/fail basis.
ENCS 6111 Numerical Methods (4 credits)
Numerical solution of partial differential equations; weighted residuals techniques with emphasis on finite differences and finite elements; convergence, stability and consistency analysis; solution of integral equations; boundary value problems; discrete Fourier series and fast Fourier transform. A project is required.
ENCS 6141 Probabilistic Methods in Design (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENCS 6011 or equivalent.
Elements of probability theory, decision models, expected costs and benefits, models from random occurrences, extreme value statistics, Monte Carlo simulation, reliability analysis, general applications to engineering design problems. A project is required.
ENCS 6161 Probability and Stochastic Processes (4 credits)
Axioms and rules of probabilities, Bayes’ Theorem, binary communication systems, Bernoulli trials and Poisson Theorem, random variables, distributions and density functions, moments, correlation, Chebyshev and Markov’s inequalities, characteristic functions, Chernoff inequality, transformation of random variable, random processes, stationarity, Bernoulli, Random Walk, Poisson, shot noise, random telegraph, and Wiener processes, stopping time; Wald’s equation, elements of Renewal Theory, Mean-Ergodic Theorem, auto and cross-correlation functions, correlation time, auto-correlation receiver, Wiener-Khinchin Theorem, power spectral density, linear system with stochastic inputs, matched filtering. Project: two hours per week.
Note: Students who have received credit for ELEC 6161 may not take this course for credit.
ENCS 6181 Optimization Techniques I (*) (4 credits)
The optimization problem; classical optimization; one dimensional search techniques; unconstrained gradient techniques; quadratically convergent minimization algorithms; constrained optimization; constrained gradient techniques; penalty-function methods; applications. Project: two hours per week.
ENCS 6191 Fuzzy Sets and Fuzzy Logic (4 credits)
Fuzzy sets, operations on fuzzy sets, fuzzy relations; fuzzy logic: connectives, implication functions, representation of fuzzy rules and fuzzy logic based reasoning; fuzzy logic in planning and control: Zadeh’s Generalized Modus Ponens type reasoning, Mamdani type reasoning, fuzzy clustering based system identification and Sugeno type reasoning; case studies. Projects on selected applications.
ENCS 6721 Technical Writing and Research Methods for Scientists and Engineers (3 credits)
This course provides graduate students with the research writing and presentation skills that are essential in academic and professional contexts. Students develop expertise and confidence in research methods, critical reading, crafting thesis statements, leading and participating in discussions, revision/editing and peer review, maintaining research dossiers and report writing.
Note: This course cannot be taken within the credit requirements of any graduate Engineering and Computer Science program, with the exception of the Diploma in Computer Science, the Master of Engineering and the Master of Applied Computer Science. Students who have taken ENCS 591B (Technical Writing and Research Methods) may not take this course for credit.
ENCS 6811 Optical Networking: Architectures and Protocols (4 credits)
This course introduces advanced concepts and protocols of modern telecommunication networks based on Photonic technology. The basics of optical communications networks will be introduced, including the enabling technology, and the main emphasis will be on network architectures and associated protocols. This includes: orientation of transport networks and their evolution (Ring and Mesh topologies); Wavelength Division Multiplexing (WDM); wavelength-routed networks; wavelength conversion; lightpath routing protocols (static, dynamic, adaptive routing and traffic grooming) and optimization problems; control and management protocols and distributed provisioning; survivable network design (proactive and reactive); fault-management and various network restoration protocols; convergence of optical networks and the Internet (IP/WDM) and Generalized Multi Protocol Label Switching (G-MPLS). There will be various assignments in which students will be involved in research projects. Knowledge of telecommunication systems and a background in network simulation is needed. Project.
ENCS 6821 Development and Global Engineering (4 credits)
This is an introductory course in international development and global engineering for graduate students. Topics may include evolution of development, globalization, development projects, planning and analysis, and participatory data gathering. A project is required.
ENCS 691 Topics in Engineering and Computer Science (4 credits)
Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the topic title following the course number on the student record, e.g. ENCS 691 Course Topic: Environment and Social Sustainability.
ENCS 6931 Industrial Stage and Training (9 credits)
Prerequisite: Completion of at least twenty credits in the program and permission of the Departmental Co-op Program Director.
This is an integral component of the Industrial Experience option that is to be completed under the supervision of an experienced engineer/computer scientist in the facilities of a participating company (a Canadian work permit is required).
Each student receives an assessment from the Departmental Co-op Program Director in consultation with the industry supervisor and the faculty advisor. Grading is on a pass/fail basis based on a proposal, monthly progress reports, a final report and a presentation.
ENCS 8011 PhD Seminar (****) (2 credits)
Prerequisite: ENCS 8511 Doctoral Research Proposal.
The PhD Seminar is designed to train students to communicate the results of their research projects to the community and participate in research discussions. This is done when the students have sufficiently progressed into their research, normally after 6 (12 for part-time students) months of being admitted to candidacy, which is normally after 24 (48 for part-time students) months of residency, and must be completed before the submission of the thesis. The student’s evaluation, reflected by either a pass or fail grade, is based upon attendance in all seminars, a report on the student’s thesis research under the direction of the thesis supervisor(s), and a presentation.
Note: Students who have completed ENCS 8011 prior to September 2005 may not take this Seminar for credit.
ENCS 8501 Comprehensive Examination (No credit value)
See Requirements for the Degree in Engineering Programs section.
ENCS 8511 Doctoral Research Proposal (6 credits)
The goal of the doctoral research proposal is to focus the student’s PhD research. The proposal must include an extensive critical review of previous work on the subject of the thesis, and a detailed research plan of action and expected milestones. Students are required to defend their doctoral research proposal before a committee that will normally be comprised of the same members as the comprehensive examination committee.
Note: Students admitted prior to September 1997 are not allowed to substitute ENCS 8511 for an equivalent course work.
ENGR 6071 Switched and Hybrid Control Systems (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6131 or equivalent.
Review of linear control design techniques for nonlinear systems and their limitations; introduction to Lyapunov stability, Lyapunov functions and LaSalle’s invariance principle; introduction to switched and hybrid systems using piecewise-affine systems as a motivating example; modelling and simulation of switched and hybrid systems; switching policies, hybrid automata and executions; Lyapunov stability analysis of switched and hybrid systems; stability as a convex optimization problem; Lyapunov-based control of switched and hybrid systems; controller design as a non-convex problem; stability analyses and the controller design problems; dynamic programming and optimal control techniques; extensive examples from simplified models of industrial problems in the aeronautical, automotive and process industries. The course includes a computer aided controller design project.
ENGR 6131 Linear Systems (*) (4 credits)
State-space representation of dynamic systems, canonical realizations, solutions, modal decomposition, stability. Controllability and observability, minimal realizations, state feedback, pole placement, observers, observer-based controllers. Introduction to optimal control, linear quadratic regulator, the Kalman filter. Limitation on performance of control systems, introduction to robustness. A project is required.
ENGR 6141 Nonlinear Systems (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6131.
Dynamic systems: definitions and notations; nonlinear differential equations; Lipschitz continuity; linearization; describing functions; phase plane analysis; Lyapunov stability; Popov and circle criteria; limit cycles. A project is required.
ENGR 6161 Sensors and Actuators (4 credits)
Elements of smart sensors and systems and their structures; properties of various smart materials including piezoelectric, pyroelectric, shape memory alloys, Rheological fluids, piezoresistive and magnetostrictive; physical and mathematical basis of smart materials; characterization of smart multi-functional materials; sensors and actuators in mechatronics; design and fabrication of sensors and actuators by micromachining; survey of classical system theory; design of sensors and actuators for applications in industrial and medical robotics, haptics, and other systems such as aerospace and smart structures. The students are required to undertake a project work involving design of smart sensors/actuators for specific applications.
ENGR 6191 Introduction to Biomedical Engineering (4 credits)
The origin and characteristics of biological potentials: nerve, muscle, heart, brain; the measurement of biological events; instrumentation systems: electrical safety, biomechanics, biomaterials, orthopaedic engineering; biomedical engineering applications/implications in industry. Project on a current topic.
ENGR 6201 Fluid Mechanics (4 credits)
Fundamental concepts of fluid mechanics; transport phenomena; stress-strain relation; equations of motion; exact solutions; dynamic similarity; specialized equations; laminar boundary layers; flow over immersed bodies; introduction to turbulent flow. Projects on selected topics.
ENGR 6221 Microfluidic Systems (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6201 or equivalent.
Introduction to microfluidics: continuum fluid mechanics, non-continuum regimes, molecular approach. Review of classical fluid mechanics: gas flows, liquid flows, two-phase flows. Microfluidic effects: low Reynolds number flows and chaotic mixing, electrokinetics, surface tension effects and electrowetting. Electrostatic/electromagnetic/piezoelectric actuation of microfluidic systems. Methods in microfluidics: computation, experimentation. Microfluidic components: microchannels, micromixers, micropumps, microvalves, microsesors. Overview of microfluidic applications: lab-on-chip devices, microstructured fuel cells. A project is required.
ENGR 6231 Microfluidic Devices for Synthetic Biology (*) (4 credits)
Topics include introduction to microfluidic components (pumps, valves, automation), programming microfluidics, fabrication techniques, microfluidic paradigms, and applications for chemical and biological analysis; introduction to synthetic biology, biological parts and their properties, network structure and pathway engineering, synthetic networks, manipulating DNA and measuring responses, basic behaviour of genetic circuits, building complex genetic networks; integration of mircofluidics and synthetic biology; economic implications. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken ENGR 691 (Microfluidic Devices for Synthetic Biology) may not take this course for credit.
ENGR 6241 Hydrodynamics (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6201.
Fundamental concepts of ideal flow; irrotational flow patterns; kinematics of flow; potential theory; standard flow patterns; conformal transformation; Cauchy-Riemann condition; complex operator; simple engineering applications. A project is required.
ENGR 6251 The Finite Difference Method in Computational Fluid Dynamics (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6201.
Classification of second order partial differential equations, boundary conditions. Finite difference discretization of equations, truncation error, explicit and implicit formulations. Numerical stability, consistency and convergence. Time dependent (parabolic) equations, explicit and implicit discretization, stability, convergence. Steady state (elliptic) equations, explicit and implicit discretization, iterative and direct solution methods. Hyperbolic equations. Formulation of flow problems and applications to incompressible, compressible and transonic inviscid and viscous flows are interspersed throughout the course. Project on specific topic or applications.
ENGR 6261 The Finite Element Method in Computational Fluid Dynamics (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6201.
Classification of second order partial differential equations, boundary conditions. The finite element method, simple examples, assembly rules, solution of linear systems of equations. Forming the modules of a general FEM computer code. The variational approach, variational principles and stationary functions. Elements and interpolation functions. The weighted residual approach Rayleigh-Ritz, least squares, subdomain and collocation, weak Galerkin formulation. Formulation of flow problems and applications to incompressible, compressible and transonic inviscid and viscous flows are interspersed throughout the course. Project on specific topic or applications.
ENGR 6281 Modelling Turbulent Flows (4 credits)
Computational methods in fluid mechanics, the Reynolds-averaged equations, scales of turbulence, two-point correlation tensors, algebraic models, one equation and two equation models, Boussinesq approximation, nonlinear constitutive relations, types of turbulent flows, multiple time scales and stiff differential equations, solution convergence and grid sensitivity, brief introduction to advanced models. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for ENGR 691C (Modelling Turbulent Flows) may not take this course for credit.
ENGR 6291 Rheology (4 credits)
Viscoelasticity, standard flows and material functions, relationships between material functions, generalized Newtonian fluid, the Maxwell model, finite linear viscoelasticity, continuum constitutive equations, effects of material, temperature and pressure on viscoelasticity behaviour, rheometry issues in viscoelastic flow simulations, industrial applications of rheology. A project is required.
Note: Basic understanding of fluid mechanics is required.
ENGR 6301 Advanced Dynamics (4 credits)
Dynamics of rigid bodies; generalized coordinates; D’Alembert’s principle; Lagrange’s equations; energy methods, Hamilton’s theory; Euler-Lagrange equations; variational principle of mechanics. Phase space canonical transformation. Language multipliers methods. Hamilton-Jacobe equation. Project on specific topic or applications.
ENGR 6311 Vibrations in Machines and Structures (*) (4 credits)
Vibrations of discrete systems: Single-Degree of Freedom (SDOF) and Multi-Degree of Freedom (MDOF) systems; continuous systems: bars, beams, membranes and plates with various boundary conditions; mode superposition; energy methods; Rayleigh-Ritz Method; condensation techniques; applications to machine components, rotor bearing systems, vehicle and aerospace structures. Project on selected topics is an integral part of the course.
ENGR 6371 Micromechatronic Systems and Applications (*) (4 credits)
Introduction to microsystems and devices; mechanical properties of materials used in microsystems; microfabrication and post-processing techniques; sacrificial and structural layers; lithography, deposition and etching; introduction and design of different types of sensors and actuators; micromotors and other microdevices; mechanical design, finite element modelling; design and fabrication of free-standing structures; microbearings; special techniques: double sided lithography, electrochemical milling, laser machining, LIGA, influence of IC fabrication methods on mechanical properties; application examples in biomedical, industrial and space technology areas; integration, bonding and packaging of MEMS devices. This course includes a project.
ENGR 6411 Robotic Manipulators I: Mechanics (*) (4 credits)
Types of industrial robots and their applications. Mathematical analysis for robot manipulation: homogeneous transformations; definition and solution of kinematic equations governing the position and orientation of the hand. Force analysis and static accuracy; forces and moments of inertia, dynamic equation of equilibrium, differential equations of motion of robotic arms. Robotic actuators. Project on specific topic or applications.
ENGR 6412 Autonomy for Mobile Robots (*) (4 credits)
Topics include application of autonomous wheeled robots: autonomous cars, indoor robots, (off-road) unmanned ground vehicles; robot motion models, robot odometry; robot sensor models: beam models of range finders, feature-based measurement models; occupancy grid mapping; the Bayes Filter; the Kalman filter; the particle filter; robot localization: particle filter localization, Kalman filter localization; introduction to simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM). A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for ELEC 691 MM (Autonomy for Mobile Robots) may not take this course for credit.
ENGR 6421 Standards, Regulations and Certification (4 credits)
Overview of DoT and other international (FAA, etc.) aviation standards, regulations and certification procedures; regulatory areas, namely, pilot training/testing, air traffic procedures, aircraft systems design and airworthiness; development process for new regulations and criteria for certification. Projects on selected topics.
ENGR 6441 Materials Engineering for Aerospace (4 credits)
Fundamentals of materials engineering and processing with special emphasis on aerospace engineering materials and protection against failure; microstructures, phase equilibria for aerospace materials, dislocations, deformation, strain hardening and annealing, recovery, recrystallization; hot and cold metal forming (aircraft fabrication), solidification, castings (process and defects); welding and non-destructive testing, solid solution and dispersion strengthening; ferrous alloys and super alloys, light alloys (AL, MG, TI), ceramic materials, polymers, composite materials (polymer matrix/metal matrix); corrosion, fatigue and creep failure; fracture and wear. Projects on selected topics.
ENGR 6461 Avionic Navigation Systems (4 credits)
Introduction: history of air navigation; earth coordinate and mapping systems; international navigation standards; airspace and air traffic control structure; basics of flight instruments and flight controls; fundamental concepts of navigation. Classification of modern avionic navigation systems. Basics of air traffic communication: radio wave propagation; VHF and HF systems. Short range, long range, approach/terminal area avionic navigation systems and radar systems: principles; design; advantages/disadvantages; errors; impact of global positioning system and future trends. Introduction to advanced integrated avionic systems. Projects on selected topics.
ENGR 6471 Integration of Avionics Systems (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6461.
Introduction to the basic principles of integration of avionics systems; review of Earth’s geometry and Newton’s laws; inertial navigation sensors and systems (INS); errors and uncertainty in navigation; global positioning system (GPS); differential and carrier tracking GPS applications; terrestrial radio navigation systems; Kalman filtering; integration of navigation systems using Kalman filtering; emphasis on integration of GPS and INS using Kalman filtering. A project is required.
ENGR 6501 Applied Elasticity (4 credits)
Plane stress and strain; analysis of stress and strain in three dimensions; Airy’s stress function; solution of two-dimensional problems by polynomials and Fourier series; effect of small holes in bars and plates; torsion and bending of prismatic bars; Membrane analogy; thermoelasticity; rectangular, circular, ring-shaped flat plates; applications in civil and mechanical engineering. A case study or a project is required.
ENGR 6151 Continuum Mechanics (4 credits)
This course presents the macroscopic mechanical behaviour of continuously distributed solid and fluid materials. This is a fundamental graduate course in the field of mechanical or aerospace engineering, which  covers basic principles of continuum mechanics and their engineering applications. All laws of continuum mechanics are formulated in terms of quantities that are independent of coordinates. Thus, in this course, first the concept of tensors is presented in detail as the linear transformation. This is followed by the formulation of the kinematics of very small and large deformation and the description of stresses and the basic laws of continuum mechanics common to all materials. Finally, constitutive equations governing the behaviours of idealized materials, including the elastic, hyperelastic and viscous materials, are presented as applications of these laws. A project is required.
ENGR 6511 Fundamentals of Finite Element Analysis of Structures (*) (4 credits)
Topics include matrix formulation of the force and of the displacement methods of analysis; direct stiffness approach, finite element methods for structural analysis; truss, beam, plane strain, plane stress, shell and solid elements; computer applications. A project is required.
ENGR 6531 The Finite Element Method in Structural Mechanics (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6511.
Displacement analysis of structures; finite elements of a continuum; applications of the method to stress analysis of two-and three-dimensional structures; stability problems; vibrations and heat transfer; digital computer applications. A project is required.
ENGR 6541 Structural Dynamics (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6511.
Dynamic behaviour of structures; lumping of masses; motion of elastic framed structures caused by arbitrary disturbances; analytical and numerical methods of solution; approximate determinations of natural frequencies in elastic systems; dynamic response of framed structures in the inelastic range; continuous systems, introduction to approximate design methods. A case study or a project is required.
ENGR 6551 Theory of Elastic and Inelastic Stability (4 credits)
Analysis of elastic and inelastic stability of columns; frame buckling; beam-columns, strength of plates, shear webs and shells; torsiona; flexural buckling of thin-walled, open sections; snap-through; critical discussion of current design specifications; applications to structures. A case study or a project is required.
ENGR 6561 Theory of Plates and Shells (4 credits)
Analysis of deformation and stress in plates and flat slabs under transverse loads; various boundary conditions; numerical methods; membrane stresses and displacements in shells under various loading; bending theory of shells; limit analysis of rotationally symmetric plates and shells; applications to shell type structures such as folded plate structures; sandwich plates; shell roofs and pressure vessels. A case study or a project is required.
ENGR 6571 Energy Methods in Structural Mechanics (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6511.
Principles of virtual work, total potential and complementary energy. Reisner’s Principle. Introduction to calculus of variations. Ritz and Galerkin’s methods. Applications to frame, plate and shell structures. A project is required.
ENGR 6581 Introduction to Structural Dynamics (*) (4 credits)
Theory of vibrations. Dynamic response of simple structural systems. Effects of blast, wind, traffic and machinery vibrations. Basic concepts in earthquake resistant design. Computer applications. A case study or a project is required.
ENGR 6601 Principles of Solar Engineering (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 6541.
Magnitude and availability of the solar energy input, including seasonal and diurnal variations of direct beam radiation; spectral distribution of sunlight; scattering and absorption processes; diffuse radiation; influence of cloud cover. Magnitude and time variation of typical loads, including space heating and cooling water heating; dehumidification. Principles of passive and active methods of solar collection, thermal conversion, and energy storage. Analysis of systems and components, including treatment of thermal and turbulent losses; efficiency calculations; electrical analogies; impedance matching and system optimization. Economics of systems. A case study or a project is required.
ENGR 6611 Equipment Design for Solar Energy Conversion (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6201.
This course emphasizes the mechanical design of solar heating and cooling systems and consists of the following topics: thermodynamic analysis of radiation, collection and conversion of solar energy, selection and manufacturing of components such as collectors, piping, line insulation, heat exchangers, etc., solar cooling and dehumidification, control of solar energy systems, case studies and project experiences. A case study or a project is required.
ENGR 6661 Solar Energy Materials Science (4 credits)
The place of organisms and materials in the solar energy cycle; physical, chemical and optical phenomena. Selective absorbers: surfaces and films, emissivity, thermal conversion, role of crystal defects and phase interfaces in metals and semiconductors. Reflector characteristics and damage modes. Optical and mechanical properties of glass, polymer and composite windows. Photovoltaic: physics and materials. Chemical, thermal and photo stability. Thermal transfer and storage media: gaseous, aqueous, organic; phase change and particulate systems; stability and corrosive effects. A case study or a project is required.
ENGR 6811 Energy Resources: Conventional and Renewable (4 credits) Depletion of conventional energy sources. Emission of greenhouse gases from conventional power production systems. Principles of renewable energy systems; cogeneration of electrical and thermal energy, photovoltaic systems, wind power, fuel cells, hybrid systems. Hydrogen and other forms of energy storage for renewable power production. Integrated and small-scale renewable energy systems; independent versus grid-connected systems. A case study or a project is required.
ENGR 691 Topics in Engineering I (4 credits)
See Note in Topic Area E02
ENGR 692 Case Study and Report (1 credit)
Students complete a case study and submit a report on a topic related to the students’ discipline, supervised by a professor, and approved by the Graduate Program Director in students' home department. The case study and report must present a current engineering problem or practice related to the students' research interest.
Note: This course cannot be taken by students enrolled in the SOEN program.
ENGR 6951 Seminar on Space Studies (4 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of Instructor.
Introduction to the science and technology of spaceflight; remote sensing; human factors in space; automation and robotics; space law; space transportation systems; the space station; the Moon-Mars initiative; space utilization; interplanetary travel. Project on selected topic.
ENGR 6971 Project and Report I (4 credits)
See Requirements for the Degree in Engineering Programs section. Project: 8 hours per week.
ENGR 6981 Project and Report II (4 credits)
See Requirements for the Degree in Engineering Programs section. Project: 8 hours per week.
ENGR 6991 Project and Report III (5 credits)
See Requirements for the Degree in Engineering Programs section. Project: 10 hours per week.
ENGR 7011 Graduate Seminar in Mechanical and Industrial Engineering (1 credit)
Seminar: 2 hours per week.
ENGR 7121 Analysis and Design of Linear Multivariable Systems (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6131.
Representation of linear multivariable systems. Controllability, observability and canonical forms; poles and zeroes; multivariable system inverses; the linear quadratic regulator problem; the robust servomechanism problem; the minimal design problem; frequency-domain design techniques. Project: 2 hours per week.
ENGR 7131 Adaptive Control (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC, 6061, ENGR 6131.
Real-time parameter estimation; least-squares and regression models; recursive estimators; model reference adaptive systems (MRAS); MRAS based on gradient approach and stability theory; self-tuning regulators (STR); adaptive prediction and control; stability and convergence results, robustness issues; auto-tuning and gain scheduling; alternatives to adaptive control; practical aspects; implementation and applications. Project: 2 hours per week.
ENGR 7181 Digital Control of Dynamic Systems (4 credits)
Prerequisites: ELEC 6061, ENGR 6131.
Review of discrete-time and sampled-data systems; discrete input-output and state-space equivalents; controllability and observability of sampled-data systems; controller design using transform techniques, design using state-space methods; generalized sample-data hold functions; optimal control; quantization effects; multi-rate sampling; robust control; discrete-time non-linear systems; discrete-time multivariable systems. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for ENGR 6181 may not take this course for credit.
ENGR 7201 Micro-Gravity Fluid Dynamics (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6201.
Forces and accelerations in space environment; zero-gravity simulation, free falling capsules, flights in Keplerian trajectories, sounding rockets, and the space station; surface tension; main non-dimensional parameters; Laplace-Young equation; contact angle; Dupre’s equation; Neumann’s triangle; minimization principle associated with Laplace’s equation; equilibrium shapes of a liquid, small oscillations of ideal and viscous fluids, liquid handling problems at low gravity, liquid positioning and control, vortexing capillary; numerical simulations of liquid dynamics in microgravity environment. Projects on selected topics.
ENGR 7331 Random Vibrations (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6311.
Mathematical descriptions of stochastic processes; spectral density and correlation functions; Gaussian and non-Gaussian random processes; Markov processes and Fokker/Planck equation; response of linear and nonlinear oscillatory systems to random excitation; non-stationary and narrow-band random processes. Project on selected research topic or applications.
ENGR 7401 Robotic Manipulators II: Control (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6411.
Control of a single link manipulator; position, velocity and acceleration errors; control of a multiple link manipulator sensor: vision, proximity, touch, slip, force, compliance and force controlled robots. Computer control of robots, command languages. Introduction to intelligent robots. Project on selected topics of current interest.
ENGR 7461 Avionic Systems Design (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6461.
Definitions, purpose, history and evolution of avionic systems; cockpit displays configurations, classifications, and design considerations; ARINC communication bus system standards; air data computer system; navigation systems; automatic flight control systems; monitoring/warning/alert systems; flight management systems; system integration; advanced concepts and future trends. Projects on selected topics.
ENGR 7501 Advanced Finite Element Method in Structural Mechanics (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6511 or equivalent.
Topics include finite elements of a continuum; applications of the method to stress analysis of two- and three-dimensional structures; stability problems; vibrations and heat transfer; non-linear methods; computer applications. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken ENGR 6531 may not take this course for credit.
ENGR 7521 Advanced Matrix Analysis of Structures (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6511.
Displacement method for two- and three-dimensional analysis of structures. Nonlinear large displacement analysis by stiffness method. Matrix formulations of vibration and stability problems. Computer applications. A project is required.
ENGR 7531 Boundary Element Method in Applied Mechanics (4 credits)
Boundary integral formulations of Axi-Symmetric, two- and three-dimensional potential and elastostatic problems. Treatment of thermal effects, singularity elements, infinite boundary elements. Coupling of boundary elements and finite elements. Introduction to non-linear, elastostatic problems. Numerical implementation. A case study or a project is required.
ENGR 791 Topics in Engineering II
See Note in Topic Area E02
ENGR 7961 Industrial “Stage” and Training (6 credits)
Prerequisite: Completion of at least twelve credits in the composite option and at least twenty-one credits in the aerospace program or permission of program director.
This is an integral component of the aerospace program and the composites option in the Mechanical Engineering program that is to be completed under the supervision of an experienced engineer in the facilities of a participating company (Canadian work permit is required). The topic is to be decided by a mutual agreement between the student, the participating company and the program director. The course is graded on the basis of the student’s performance during the work period, which includes a technical report.
ENGR 8901 Master of Applied Science Research and Thesis (29 credits)
See Requirements for the Degree in Engineering Programs section.
ENGR 8911 Doctoral Research and Thesis (70 credits)
See Requirements for the Degree in Engineering Programs section.
Information Systems Engineering
INSE 6100 Advanced Java Platforms (4 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the CIISE is required.
This course emphasizes the architecture and the inner workings of the Java virtual machine; 3 distributions of the Java Platform: the micro-addition, the standard addition and the enterprise addition; the JCP process and the Java standards purposed as API extensions; semantic foundations of Java: static semantics and dynamic semantics. Introduction of technologies that are used to accelerate (performance analysis, hardware accelerators, ahead-of-time, just-in-time, selected dynamic compilation and component-based acceleration) and secure (virtual machines, such as vulnerability analysis, Java security models, byte-code verification, access controllers, security managers, policy files, and certified compilation) Java. Semantic correctness of acceleration and security techniques will also be addressed. A project is required.
INSE 6110 Foundations of Cryptography (4 credits)
Introduction to cryptography and cryptanalysis, classical ciphers, number-theoretic reference problems, the integer factorization problem, the RSA problem, the quadratic residuosity problem, computing square roots in Zn, the discrete logarithmic problem, the diffie-hellman problem, pseudorandom bits and sequences, stream ciphers: feedback shift registers, LFSRs, RC4. Block Ciphers: SPN and Fiestel structures, DES, AES, linear cryptanalysis, differential cryptanalysis, side channel attacks, ciphertext indistinguishability, attack analysis, IND-CPA, IND-CCA, IND-CCA2, public key encryption: RSA, Rabin, ElGamal, elliptic curves cryptography, hash functions: Un-keyed hash functions, MACs, Attacks, Digital signatures: RSA, Fiat-Shamir, DSA, public key infrastructure, key management, efficient implementation of ciphers, zero-knowledge proof. A project is required.
INSE 6120 Crypto-Protocol and Network Security (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INSE 6110 or equivalent.
Cryptographic protocols, authentication protocols, key distributions protocols, e-commerce protocols, fair-exchange and contract-signing protocols, security protocol properties: authentication, secrecy, integrity, availability, non-repudiation, atomicity, certified delivery, crypto-protocol attacks, design principles for security protocols, automatic analysis, public key infrastructure, models and architectures for network security, authentication using Kerberos and X.509, email security (PGP, S/MIME), IP security, SSL/TLS protocols, virtual private networks, firewalls intrusion detection, host-based IDS, network based IDS, misuse detection methods, anomaly detection methods, intrusion detection in distributed systems, intrusion detection in wireless ad hoc networks botnet detection, analysis and mitigation, darknet traffic analysis, prediction and forecast of network threats, network security monitoring. A project is required.
INSE 6130 Operating Systems Security (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INSE 6110 or equivalent.
System security, Windows security, Linux security, Unix security, access control matrix, HRU result, OS security mechanisms, security administration, access control list, capability list, role-based access control, security policy, mandatory and discretionary access control, multi-level security, BLP policy, Biba model, conflict of interest, Chinese Wall policy, secure booting, authentication, password security, challenge response, auditing and logging, system kernel security, threat analysis, security attacks, security hardened operating, host-based intrusion detection, securing network services, firewalls and border security, registry security, embedded and real-time OS security, information flow control. A project is required.
INSE 6140 Malware Defenses and Application Security (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INSE 6110 or equivalent.
Malicious code, taxonomy, viruses, worms, trojan horses, logical and temporal bombs, infection process, security properties of applications, safety, high level security, detection approaches, ad hoc techniques: scanning, anti-virus technology, obfuscation, dynamic analysis for security: passive and active monitoring, in-line and reference monitors, sandboxing, static analysis for security: data and control flow analysis for security, type-based analysis for security, anti-reverse-engineering protection, software fingerprinting, self-certified code: certifying compilers, proof carrying code, efficient code certification, typed assembly languages, certificate generation, certificate verification and validation, C and C++ security, java security, byte-code verification, access controllers, security managers, permission files, security APIs, critical APIs, protection domains, security profiles, mobile code security. A project is required.
INSE 6150 Security Evaluation Methodologies (4 credits)
Security evaluation of information systems, security evaluation of software, security evaluation of products. Security code inspection, security testing, security standards, preparation of a security evaluation: impact scale, likelihood scale, severity scale. Vulnerability analysis, risk analysis, security plan elaboration. ITSEC, MARION, and MEHARI methods, OCTAVE, common criteria, target of evaluation, protection profile, security functional requirement, security factors, errors, accidents, assurance requirements, assurance levels, evaluation process, compliance with the protection profile, IT security ethics, privacy, digital copyright, licensing IT security products, computer fraud and abuse, incident handling, business records, security forensics, security evaluation case studies. Information security governance: risk management, business strategy, standards, COBIT. Situation awareness. A project is required.
INSE 6160 Database Security and Privacy (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INSE 6110 or equivalent.
Access control in relational databases; grant/revoke model; security by views; query modification; Oracle VPD; auditing in databases; information warfare in databases; multi-level database security; polyinstantiation and covert channel; statistical database security; inference control; security by auditing; microdata security; random perturbation; outsourced database security, encrypted databases; SQL injection attack; anomaly detection in databases; data privacy, P3P; Hippocratic databases; perfect secrecy-based privacy; k-anonymity model; l-diversity; data utility measure, data release with public algorithms, multi-party privacy preserving computation; privacy in OLAP. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for INSE 691A (Database Security and Privacy) may not take this course for credit.
INSE 6170 Network Security Architecture and Management (4 credits)
Security architecture and management, risk and threats, security attributes and properties, security design principles, security standards, security defence toolkit, and security building blocks, corporate VoIP, residential IPTV, IMS, cloud services, security functions and their implementation, operational considerations of deployment and management of security, configuration, vulnerability management and updates, incident management, emerging challenges and innovative solutions. A project is required.
INSE 6180 Security and Privacy Implications of Data Mining (4 credits)
Introduction to data mining and its applications; privacy legislations security and privacy threats caused by current data mining techniques; risks and challenges in emerging data mining applications; attacks and prevention methods: web privacy attacks, data mining-based intrusion detection; privacy-preserving data mining; privacy-preserving data publishing. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for INSE 691D (Security Implications of Data Mining) may not take this course for credit.
INSE 6190 Wireless Network Security (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INSE 6110 or equivalent.
Introduction to wireless network security; security issues in cellular networks; authentication/key management in wireless LAN; secure handover; security in mobile IP; security issues in mobile ad-hoc networks: trust establishment, secure routing, anonymity; anonymous sensory data collection; privacy for smartphone applications. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for INSE 691B (Wireless Security) may not take this course for credit.
INSE 6210 Total Quality Methodologies in Engineering (4 credits)
Methodologies for quality engineering: six sigma, ACE (Achieving Competitive Excellence), Lean engineering, ISO9000 series; comparative study, quality clinic process charts, relentless root cause analysis, mistake proofing, market feedback analysis, process improvement and waste elimination, visual control, standard work and process management, process certification, setup reduction, total productive maintenance, DMAIC and DMADV processes, define phase, project charter, project scoping and planning, measure phase, critical to quality requirements, quality functional deployment, analyze phase, functional and process requirements, design requirements, design concepts, high-level design capability elaboration and evaluation, design phase, detailed design capability elaboration and evaluation, failure mode and effects analysis, control and verification plans, verify phase, pilot-scale processes, pilot testing and evaluation, implementation planning, full-scale processes, start-up and testing, performance evaluation, turnover to operations and maintenance, transition to process management, project closure. A project is required.
INSE 6220 Advanced Statistical Approaches to Quality (4 credits)
Introduction to quality control and total quality, statistical concepts and techniques in quality control, graphical methods for data presentation and quality improvement, statistical basis for control charts, pattern analysis in control charts, control charts for variables, control charts for individual measurements, control charts for attributes, process capability analysis, CUSUM charts and EWMA charts, acceptance sampling by attributes, acceptance plans by variables, reliability models, reliability and life testing plans, multivariate quality control, multivariate methods, aspects of multivariate analysis, multivariate normal distribution, multivariate tests of hypotheses, multivariate analysis of variance, principal components analysis, factor analysis, discrimination and classification, multivariate quality control, multivariate linear regression, design of experiments (DOE), Taguchi method, completely randomized design (CRD), randomized complete block design (RCBD), incomplete block designs, latin square designs, graeco-latin square designs, factorial designs, fractional factorial designs, split plot designs, and nested designs (compared to cross-over designs), quality in the service sector, service industries and their characteristics, model for service quality and applications. A project is required.
INSE 6230 Total Quality Project Management (4 credits)
Role of a project manager, learning and applications, project management processes, project management in quality initiatives, intellectual property protection, customer project management and critical-to-quality requirements, project planning and execution, team formation, goals, roles, procedures and interpersonal relationship, types of teams, creating a project plan, project tracking, project compliance requirements, sourcing and supplier qualification, government contract data rights, government property, risk management process, action planning, project communication, customer, team and stakeholder communications, communication planning and strategy, web-based collaboration, project management software tools. A project is required.
INSE 6240 Executive Communication (1 credit)
Communication plan elaboration, preparing presentations, developing a sound strategy, organizing for effectiveness, capturing the audience, the impromptu speech, introducing a speaker, reading a paper, leading a conference, interpersonal communication, use of voice, active listening, assertive speaking, giving and receiving feedback, assertive techniques, work styles, conflict and dispute resolution, negotiation, managing difficult situations, writing skills, interpersonal communications, business letters, formal reports, communication technology. A project is required.
INSE 6250 Quality Methodologies for Software (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INSE 6210 or equivalent, COMP 5541 or equivalent.
Quality methodologies for software, calculating sigma values, graphical analysis, quality processes for software, MAIC, DMADV, define overview, project context, initial analysis and design, lifecycle and multi-generational planning, project management, risk analysis, measure overview, customer needs, quality functional deployment for software, software metrics and requirements, scorecards, meta-models, specification languages (SDL, B, Z, etc.), software modelling (UML, Core, IDEF, etc.), graphical languages, design and verify overview, failure mode and effect analysis for software, defensive programming, smart and simple design, peer reviews, performance analysis, statistical tools, software testing, software verification. A project is required.
INSE 6260 Software Quality Assurance (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INSE 6210 or equivalent, COMP 5541 or equivalent.
Quality assurance, quality factors, components of a software quality assurance system, contract review, software development and quality plans, activities and alternatives, integration of quality activities in a project lifecycle, reviews, software inspection, software verification, testing processes, static analysis, control-flow analysis, data-flow analysis, control-flow testing, loop testing, data-flow testing, transaction-flow testing, domain testing, type-based analysis, dynamic analysis, usage models, operational profiles, result and defect analysis, reliability, performance analysis, maintenance and reverse engineering, case tools and software quality assurance. A project is required.
INSE 6270 Quality-Based Systems Engineering (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INSE 6210 or equivalent.
System engineering, quality-based system development process, acquisition and specification of system requirements, system design and prototyping, system implementation and testing, modelling languages for system engineering (SysML, IDEF, CORE, etc.), exchange mechanisms for system engineering data (AP233, XMI, etc.) gathering, specification, formulation, and refinement of system requirements, customer requirements, market requirements, technical requirements, implementation requirements, eco-requirements (scenario-based requirements gathering and refinement, affinity diagram, analytic hierarchy analysis), conflict resolution (TRIZ), management of system requirements in the design process (axiomatic design, decision tree, morphology matrix, systematic design), management of system requirements in the implementation process (six-sigma, ACE, Lean, ISO 9000, ERP, SAP, CMMS), case studies. A project is required.
INSE 6280 Quality Assurance for Systems Engineering (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INSE 6210 or equivalent, previously or concurrently.
Introduction to quality assurance and quality factors in systems engineering, components of a quality assurance system, principles of verification, validation and accreditation of systems, Vvsystem modelling languages, model semantics, techniques for V principles of system simulation (types of problems, simulation systems and their classification, principles of simulation system design and implementation), verification and validation techniques for simulation models (problem entity, conceptual model, and computerized model), development of simulation platforms, standards for system simulation, high level architecture (HLA). A project is required.
INSE 6290 Quality in Supply Chain Design (4 credits)
Evolution of supply chain, lingo, notation, master planning, role in business, performance analysis, activity profiling, strategic quality planning for supply chain, inventory planning and management (IP&M), perfect order percentage, inventory turns, fill rates and substitutions, purchase and customer order cycle times, customer service and order processing (CS&OP), network planning, supply contracts, distribution strategies, coordinated product and supply chain design, quality and innovation in product design, design for maintainability, designing for reliability, environmental considerations in supply chain design, designing quality services, make, buy, and sourcing analysis, supplier partnerships, global sourcing active assembly, supply chain management systems, efficient transportation, efficient warehousing, impact of e-commerce on supply chains, information technology and decision support systems, e-business strategies, e-business transactions, e-commerce platforms for supply chain. A project is required.
INSE 6300 Quality Assurance in Supply Chain Management (4 credits)
Supply chain management, definition, models, evolution and evaluation, quality attributes, evaluation criteria, key supply chain management issues, supply chain cost reduction opportunities, sales and operating planning hierarchy, gathering data required for sales and operation planning, inventory management techniques, effective supply chain management, supply and demand synchronization, aligning customer demands to order fulfillment, management of supply chain constraints, supply chain performance measurements, supply chain Information, communication, security, information flows, security measures, global supply chain quality and international quality standards, customer driven quality, managing supplier quality in the supply chain, the tools of quality; statistically based quality improvement for variables and attributes; managing quality improvement teams and projects. A project is required.
INSE 6310 Systems Engineering Maintenance Management (4 credits)
Maintenance concepts in engineering systems; component replacement; optimal component preventive replacement intervals; age-based replacement models for components; spare parts provision; optimal inspection decisions; condition based maintenance systems; proportional hazards model; capital equipment replacement; maintenance resource planning; reliability centered maintenance; equipment degradation analysis; degradation prediction; maintenance information system; maintenance software. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for INSE 691C (Systems Engineering Maintenance Management) may not take this course for credit.
INSE 6311 Sustainable Infrastructure Planning and Management Systems (4 credits)
This multi-disciplinary course will provide the basic knowledge for developing advanced information systems that can be used to systematically plan and manage infrastructure (e.g. roads and bridges) throughout its lifecycle, including environmental impact assessment. The course will cover the following topics: Definition and history of Infrastructure, Types and functions of Infrastructure, Infrastructure Planning, Performance Modelling, Failure Analysis and Reliability Issues, Infrastructure Inspection and Monitoring, Maintenance and Rehabilitation Strategies, Environmental Management and Sustainability Issues, and Integrated Infrastructure Management Systems. Projects.
INSE 6320 Risk Analysis for Information and Systems Engineering (4 credits)
Introduction to risk analysis theory. Risk assessment methodologies, risk assessment techniques and standards for information systems, review of probability theory, hazard identification, fault tree analysis, event tree analysis, sensitivity analysis, qualitative risk analysis, quantitative risk analysis, case studies on information systems, value analysis and integrated risk management. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for INSE 691H (Risk Analysis for Information and Systems Engineering) may not take this course for credit.
INSE 6400 Principles of Systems Engineering (4 credits)
Origins of systems engineering; modern engineering systems; structure of complex systems; systems life cycle; systems engineering management; system decomposition and architecture; systems with uncertain and imperfect information; structural and dynamics modelling; integration and evaluation: production, operation and support; systems engineering decision tools; special topics: systems of systems, sustainability, mass collaboration. A project is required.
INSE 6411 Product Design Theory and Methodology (4 credits)
This course introduces main design theories and methodologies for the conceptual and configuration design of mechanical/manufacturing systems. It includes the following topics: general design process; introduction to design theory and methodologies; user requirements analysis; structure of design problem; design concept and product configuration generation methods; evaluation of design concepts and product configuration; sources and resolution strategies of design conflicts; computer-assistance of all these tasks; and case studies of product design. A project is required.
INSE 6421 Systems Integration and Testing (4 credits)
Introduction to integration and testing of complex systems; fundamentals of project planning; process analysis; workflow modelling; six sigma tools and methodologies for systems integration; formulation of systems operational assessment and concept; systems architecture, functions and capabilities composition and packaging into high-level system architecture; modelling and analysis methods for representing system functionality and capability; interface description and management; testability and interoperability testing; management issues pertaining to integrated product teams, vendors, suppliers, and subcontractors. A project is required.
INSE 6431 Ad Hoc Wireless Networks: Architectures and Protocols (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6851, COMP 6461 or equivalent.
Design, provisioning and management of ad hoc wireless networks. Concepts, architectures and protocols related to the efficient design and high performance of ad hoc wireless networks. Medium access control schemes; mathematical analysis. Analysis of access protocols in multihop networks; derive the system capacity. Study of various control knobs for improving the network capacity; power control, physical carrier sense turning, rate control, interference mitigation, and channel diversity. Study emerging issues such as supporting quality of service in wireless networks; security issues in wireless networks, broadband wireless access; wireless mesh networks; their integration with wired networks; vehicular ad hoc networks and related protocols. A project is required.
INSE 6441 Applied Game Theory and Mechanism Design (4 credits)
Fundamentals of game theory; equilibrium concepts; strategic games; extensive games; Bayesian games; game strategies in network security; game theory for trust and reputation; fundamentals of mechanism design; optimal mechanisms; efficient mechanisms; incentive compatibility; incentives and information security; revelation principle and trust; analysis tools; applications: security protocols, supply chain, trust and reputation, social networks. A project is required.
INSE 6510 Video Game Technology and Development (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COMP 5511 or equivalent, previously or concurrently.
This course is part development and part technology, and will cover the process of commercial video game development, and software design patterns used for game design. The course provides an in-depth understanding of how the game design process works. Students work with a game engine software framework to design and implement several kinds of games. Video game history. Basic Building blocks of a game. Elements of game design. Game Maker: objects, sprites, events. Space Shooter. Developing games with Games Factory. Real Time Strategy game development. A project is required.
INSE 6530 3D Graphics and Computer Animation for Game Design (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COMP 6761 or equivalent, previously or concurrently.
Application of 3D graphics and animation topics to non real-time rendered media. Current research topics in computer animation such as dynamic simulation of flexible and rigid objects, automatically-generated control systems, and evolution of behaviours. History of Animation. Animation Basics. Keyframe Animation. Path Animation. Non-Linear Animation. Modelling Concerns for Animation. Rigging for Forward and Inverse Kinematics. Morphing. Expressions. Particle Systems. Dynamics. A project is required.
INSE 6610 Cybercrime Investigations (4 credits)
Introduction to cybercrimes: unauthorized access, mischief to data, possession of hacking tools, possession of child pornography; Legal aspects: Canadian judicial system, computer crime laws, charter of rights, common law, mutual legal assistance treaty, search warrants, production and assistance orders, international laws, upcoming legal changes; Investigation process: search planning, acquisition methods, environment recognition, evidence identification; Reporting process: investigation and analysis reports, notes taking; authority of seizure; forensic interviews; Computer crime trials: witness preparation, court sentencing, rebuttal witness, cross-examination, testimony, credibility attacks; in-depth case studies. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for INSE 691E (Cybercrime Investigations) may not take this course for credit.
INSE 6620 Cloud Computing Security and Privacy (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INSE 6110 or equivalent.
Cloud computing concepts, SOA and cloud, virtualization and cloud, cloud service delivery models, cloud storage models, cloud deployment scenarios, public/ private/ hybrid/ community cloud, cloud computing architectures, SaaS, PaaS, IaaS, agility, scalability and elasticity of cloud, cloud security, cloud privacy, homomorphic encryption, searching encrypted cloud data, secure data outsourcing, secure computation outsourcing, proof of data possession / retrievability, virtual machine security, trusted computing in clouds, cloud-centric regulatory compliance, business and security risk models, cloud user security, identity management in cloud, SAML, applications of secure cloud computing.
INSE 6630 Recent Developments in Information Systems Security (4 credits)
Prerequisites: Any two of INSE 6110, INSE 6120, INSE 6130, or INSE 6140.
Security and privacy legislations. New security threats and solution on personal computers, enterprise computers, personal information, confidential information, identity fraud, financial fraud, and social networking. Recent developments in trusted computing for critical cyber infrastructure, privacy-aware information sharing, cybercrime, and cyber forensics techniques. Cyber espionage, cyber terrorism, and cyber war. A project is required.
INSE 6640 Smart Grids and Control System Security (4 credits)
Overview of electric grid operation, evolution to the smart grid, smart grid components, dynamic pricing, promotion of “green” resources, governmental regulation, network standards, consumer privacy, risks to the smart grid, physical security and protections against tampering for smart grid environments, device level security, authorization and access control, consumer privacy protection, cryptographic mechanisms for smart grid environments, secure key management, communication security in smart grid, privacy of user data for Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI), security standards for smart grid, supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA), SCADA architecture, SCADA Security, SCADA monitoring, SCADA systems for smart grids, distributed control systems (DCS), communication infrastructure. A project is required.
INSE 6650 Trusted Computing (4 credits)
Hardware and software root of trust; establishing and attesting trust of software systems; Trusted Platform Module (TPM); CPU support for trusted computing, including existing technologies such as Intel Trusted Execution Technology (TXT), AMD Secure Virtual Machine (SVM), ARM TrustZone; secure crypto processors such as Hardware Security Modules (HSMs); bank HSM APIs and their weaknesses; attestation protocols; OS support for trusted computing; security tokens (e.g., second factor of authentication, smartcards, transaction verification code); trusted user interface; use cases: digital rights management (DRM), authentication, protected execution of security sensitive code, trusted kiosk computing, full disk encryption, malware exploiting trusted computing infrastructure; hardware and software attacks; privacy issues. A project is required.
INSE 6660 Secure Programming (4 credits)
Topics include fundamentals of secure programming; string-related vulnerabilities and defence. Pointer-related vulnerabilities and defence; memory management-related vulnerabilities and defence. Integer-related security issues; formatted output-related security issues; concurrency-related security issues; security vulnerabilities and linking; security in sockets programming; security vulnerabilities and signals; file I/O security; best practices and coding standards; design principles for secure programming; model-based secure programming; static analysis for secure programming. A project is required.
INSE 6670 Embedded Systems Security (4 credits)
Topics of this course include embedded and real-time embedded systems; embedded systems security and trust; monitoring of embedded systems; security and protection objectives for hardware; adversaries, attacks; trusted integrated circuits (TIC); hardware assisted security and trust; process reliability and security; secure program execution on embedded processors; networks on chip; secure memory access; hardware trusted platforms; secure processors; efficient security processing; energy efficient security; cryptographic processors; physical one-way functions (POWF); PUF-based security; FSM model of computation; hiding information in FSM/IC piracy protection by active hardware metering; remote enabling and disabling of ICs; watermarking for intellectual property protection (IPP); physical and invasive attacks, side-channel attacks; zero knowledge proofs; FPGA security; FPGA fingerprinting and access; hardware trojan horses. Applications (automotive domain, internet of things, cyber-physical systems, SCADA, sensor networks). A project is required.
INSE 6680 Systems Physical Security (4 credits)
Topics of this course include identifying potential security threats and vulnerabilities, threat and risk assessment; security equipment and systems (access control and biometrics technology, surveillance systems, network infrastructure supporting security technology); physical security of information systems; maximizing the value of security systems; securing transported materials; emergency management and risk mitigation; critical infrastructure protection. Overview of the Canadian Operational Standard on Physical Security, Policy on Government Security and U.S. National Response Framework. A project is required.
INSE 691 Topics in Information Systems Engineering (4 credits)
Note: Subject will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for these courses providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g., INSE 691A, INSE 691B, etc.
INSE 6961 Graduate Seminar in Information and Systems Engineering (1 credit)
Students must attend a set of seminars identified by the Concordia Institute for Information Systems Engineering and submit a comprehensive report on the topics presented in three of the seminars. This course is graded on a pass/fail basis.
INSE 7100 Design and Analysis of Security Protocols (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COEN 6311 or equivalent.
The primary objective of this course is to present the methods used in the design and analysis of modern security protocols, introduction to existing cryptographic protocols. The most important security proprieties (such as authentication, secrecy, integrity, availability, atomicity, certified delivery and other properties), flaw taxonomy (such as freshness attacks, type attacks, parallel session attacks, implementation dependent attacks, binding attacks, encapsulation attacks and other forms of attack). Cryptographic protocol specification (general-purpose formal languages, logical languages, operational languages and security calculi). Cryptographic protocol analysis (security logics analysis, model-based and algebraic analysis, process algebra analysis, type based analysis). Limitations of formal methods and ad-hoc techniques, project will be offered in analyzing a number of published cryptographic protocols. The focus of this course will be on the design and the analysis of security protocols. A project is required.
INSE 7110 Value Added Service Engineering in Next Generation Networks (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6861 or equivalent.
Telecommunications service engineering, or more simply service engineering, is the discipline that addresses the technologies and engineering process for the specification, implementation, testing, deployment, usage of value added services in telecommunication networks, value added services, or more simply services, can be defined as anything that goes beyond two party voice calls. They are either call related (e.g. call diversion, multiparty gaming, conducted conferences) or non-call related (e.g. customized stock quotes, web surfing from a cellular phone). Some services may combine call related and non-call related features (e.g. call centres). This course will cover the basics of service engineering (such as basic concepts, value added services, service life cycle, service engineering, intelligent networks, WAP/Imode/TINE-C). The basics of next generation networks (such as session initiation protocol (SIP), H.323, Megaco, H.248, 3GPP/3GPP2 architecture, softswitch). Signaling protocol-specific approaches (such as H.232 supplementary services, SIP CGI, SIP servlet API). Signaling protocol neutral approaches (such as CPL, JAIN JCC/JCAT, PARLAY; web services). Approaches at the research stage (such as context awareness; mobile code-based approaches). A project is required.
INSE 7120 Advanced Network Management (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6861 or equivalent.
Network management – basics (history and basic definitions, management frameworks, functional areas). The simple network management protocol framework (history, protocol architecture, functional architecture, information architecture, RMON, management by delegation, distributed management and JASMIN NIB, case studies). OSI systems management, TNM and other frameworks (OSI communication, information and functional models, TMN functional, physical and information architecture, case study, CORBA based management, web based management, DTMF, JMX). Interoperability issue and in-depth study of a specific functional area overview of known techniques (e.g. dual MIBs), alarm filtering techniques (e.g. artificial intelligence), alarm correlation techniques (e.g. artificial intelligence, coding theory). Approaches still a research level (mobile agent based network management, active network based network management, policy based artwork management, use of SML/web services). A project is required.
INSE 8901 Master of Applied Science Research and Thesis (25 credits)
Students must complete a 25-credit thesis as part of their degree requirements. The thesis must represent the results of the student’s independent work after admission to the program. The proposed topic for the thesis, together with a brief statement outlining the proposed method of treatment, and the arrangement made for faculty supervision, must be approved by the GCS  Graduate Studies Committee. For purposes of registration, this work will be designated as INSE 8901. The thesis will be evaluated by the student’s supervisor(s), and at least two examiners appointed by the GCS Graduate Studies Committee, one of whom shall be external to the student’s department.
Mechanical, Industrial and Aerospace Engineering
INDU 691 Topics in Industrial Engineering (4 credits)
Note: Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for these courses provided that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. INDU 691A, INDU 691B, etc.
INDU 6111 Theory of Operations Research (4 credits)
This course introduces the fundamentals of convex analysis such as polyhedral sets and the representation theorem. Advanced topics in linear optimization are also covered, such as state-of-the-art solution methods (revised and dual simplex methods, path following interior point methods), duality theory and parametric analysis, Farkas lemma, and KKT optimality conditions. An introduction to other advanced topics (Dantzig-Wolfe decomposition, dynamic programming, and stochastic decision processes) is given. A project is required.
INDU 6121 Applied Optimization (4 credits)
Topics include model building in optimization, model validation, economic interpretation, sensitivity analysis, algorithms and commercial optimization software for problem solving. Mathematical models in deterministic and nondeterministic settings with linear, integer, and nonlinear programming formulations are developed. Applications of optimization models in production, transportation, finance, scheduling, and healthcare systems are presented. A project is required.
INDU 6131 Graph Theory with System Applications (4 credits)
Basic concepts; trees, circuits and cutsets; Eulerian and Hamiltonian graphs; directed graphs; matrices of a graph, graphs and vector spaces; planarity and duality; connectivity, matching and colouring; flows in networks: max-flow min-cut theorem, minimum cost flows; optimization on graphs: minimum-cost spanning trees, optimum branching and shortest paths. Project: two hours per week.
Note: Students who have taken ENGR 6111 may not receive credit for this course.
INDU 6141 Logistics Network Models (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INDU 6121.
This course covers the following wide range of operational issues in the transportation and logistics industry. Different analytical models and their solution strategies are also introduced. Overview of transportation systems including airlines, railways, ocean liners, cargo, energy transportation and pipelines; Supply chain characterization; Site location;Distribution planning; Vehicle routing; Fleet scheduling; Crew scheduling; Demand management; Replenishment management; Revenue management; Geographic information systems; Real-time network control issues. A project is required.
INDU 6151 Decision Models in Service Sector (*) (4 credits)
Introduction to service strategy and operations. Service demand forecasting and development of new services. Service facility location and layout planning. Applications of decision models in service operations and service quality control. Cost analysis, queuing models, risk management and resource allocation models for service decisions. Service outsourcing and supply chain issues. Efficiency and effectiveness issues in different service sectors such as emergency force deployment, municipal resource allocation and health care. Case studies using operations research, operations management, and statistical techniques. A project is required.
INDU 6161 Design and Operations of Supply Chain Networks (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INDU 6121.
This course analyzes various supply chain operation issues from an engineering point of view. The course covers topics such as: supply chain issues and opportunities; performance evaluation of supply chains; supply chain planning and optimization; collaborative decision making in supply chains; transportation planning in supply chains; capacity planning in supply chains; designing global supply chains; risk management in supply chains; sustainable supply chain management. A project is required.
INDU 6211 Production Systems and Inventory Control (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INDU 6121.
This course covers various operational and planning issues in manufacturing industry: Integrated production planning and control. Large scale model development for demand forecasting, materials requirements planning and manufacturing resource planning (MRP/MRPII), production-inventory systems, production planning; models for line balancing, lot sizing, dispatching, scheduling, releasing. Models for inventory control, determination of order quantities and safety stocks, inventory replenishment systems. Supply chain management. Just-in-Time systems, lean and Agile manufacturing. A project is required.
INDU 6221 Lean Enterprise (4 credits)
This course covers topics that are necessary to establish a lean culture at the system level in various organizations:Introduction to principles of the lean enterprise, process management, waste elimination and process variation, five S’s and workplace organization, lean analysis tools and performance measurements, Lean Six Sigma, enterprise value stream mapping, visual workplace, lean product development, lean business administration. A project is required.
INDU 6231 Scheduling Theory (4 credits)
Models for sequencing and scheduling activities including: static and dynamic problems; deterministic and stochastic models. Single machine processing; parallel machine processing; multistage problems including flow-shops and job-shops. Complexity issues. Exact and heuristic solution methods. Average and worst case performance analysis of heuristic methods. Applications in manufacturing environments. Current research trends. Project: two hours per week.
Note: Students who have taken ENCS 6201 may not receive credit for this course.
INDU 6241 Lean Manufacturing (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INDU 6211.
Introduction to the basic principles and concepts of lean manufacturing; tools of lean manufacturing, including value stream mapping, standardized work, setup reduction; mapping the current state; mixed model value streams; mapping the future state; Takt time, finished goods strategy, continuous flow, level pull, pacemaker, pitch, interval; implementing the future state. A project is required.
INDU 6251 Facilities Planning and Warehouse Operations (4 credits)
This course is designed to provide advanced concepts, theory and procedures for the study of facilities location, physical layouts, material flow, and material handling, warehouse operations planning and management systems, warehouse design, automation and control. Analytical procedures are developed to enhance the decision-making process in the design, rationalization and improvement of manufacturing or service facilities. The knowledge learned in this course is integrated with knowledge from related courses to develop a design project. A project is required.
INDU 6310 Applied Probability and Statistics for Engineers (4 credits)
This course introduces probability and statistics concepts frequently used in engineering applications. Probability theory, randomness, conditional probability, joint probability, independence and probability distributions are covered. Data collection, sampling, confidence intervals, hypothesis formulation, errors, estimation topics are given. Linear and  non-linear regression, analysis of residuals and remedial measures, transformation of data, multiple, polynomial and weighted regression, model selection techniques, and joint confidence regions concepts are taught with relevant industry applications. Statistical packages are introduced. A project is required.
Note: This course may not be taken by MASc and PhD students for credit.
INDU 6311 Discrete System Simulation (4 credits)
Probability theory and queuing theory; discrete and continuous variables and their distributions; deterministic and stochastic models; building valid and credible models. Computer simulation of discrete-change systems subject to uncertainty techniques to verify quality of input data; analysis of output data; determination of simulation run-length and number of replications; random number generations, variance reduction techniques, transient and steady state behaviour; comparison of alternative systems. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken ENGR 6491 may not receive credit for this course.
INDU 6321 Introduction to Six Sigma (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INDU 6331.
Overview of the Six Sigma concept; Six Sigma deployment practice; Six Sigma methodologies for process improvement and process (DMAIC) and for product design (DMADV); Integration of Lean techniques in Six Sigma (Lean Six Sigma); Overview of different quality management tools applied in Six Sigma; Application of Designed of Experiments in Six Sigma; Design for Six Sigma through the application of the Robust Parameter Design; Six Sigma project management. A project is required.
INDU 6331 Advanced Quality Control (4 credits)
Introduction to advanced quality control and improvement concepts. Fundamentals of statistical methods and theoretical basis for quality control methods. Advanced and newly developed quality control and improvement methods such as modified and acceptance charts, multiple stream process control, control charts with adaptive sampling and engineering process control for quality. International standards of acceptance sampling. Economic design and implications of quality control and improvement procedures. A project is required.
INDU 6341 Advanced Concepts in Quality Improvement (*) (4 credits) The foundations of modern quality improvement, scientific basis of quality engineering, statistical experimental design issues such as randomized blocks, factorial designs at two levels, fractional factorial designs at two levels, applications on factorial designs, building models, and explanation and critique of Taguchi’s contributions. A project on selected topics is required.
Note: Students who have taken MECH 6461 may not receive credit for this course.
INDU 6351 System Reliability (4 credits)
Review of probability theory; definition of various measures (reliability, availability, MTTF, etc.) and related probability distributions; reliability evaluation of redundant systems (series, parallel, series-parallel, bridge network, etc.); two and three parameter Weibull analysis; failure data analysis; trend analysis; goodness of fit test (Kolmogorov/Smirnov test); introduction of stress-strength modelling; homogeneous Markov models; reliability evaluation of cold, warm, and hot standby systems; introduction to reliability testing; case studies. Knowledge of a first course in probability theory is assumed. Project: two hours per week.
Note: Students who have taken ENGR 6451 may not receive credit for this course.
INDU 6361 Discrete Optimization (4 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the instructor.
Topics include mathematical modelling of industrial and service systems by integer programming (IP); choices in model formulations; optimality, relaxations and bounds; well-solved problems in IP; computational complexity; branch-and-bound methods; polyhedral theory and cutting plane algorithms; Lagrangean duality; software for solving IPs; other optimization techniques. A project is required.
INDU 6371 Stochastic Optimization (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INDU 6111.
Topics include an overview of stochastic optimization models; two-stage and multi-stage stochastic programming; algorithms for solving large-scale stochastic programming models, including sample average approximation (SAA), L-shaped method and scenario decomposition algorithms; robust optimization approach. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for the course INDU 691X (Stochastic Optimization) may not take this course for credit.
INDU 6381 Applications of Reliability Engineering (4 credits)
Topics include an introduction to reliability function; reliability program; failure; requirement allocation and design optimization; painless risk management; design optimization by test; validation; durability; stressstrength; nuisances and no fault found (NFF); operating with failure; fail-safe and operating with failure; real-time health monitoring. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken INDU 691 (Application of Reliability Engineering) may not receive credit for this course.
INDU 6391 Reliability and Maintenance for Design and Manufacturing (4 credits)
Topics include fundamentals of product design and system validation methodologies to establish maintenance programs; design of experiment, test for design validation, pass/fail analysis, reliability growth models, reliability centred maintenance, test for manufacturing; accelerated life and stress tests; failure reporting, analysis and corrective action systems (FRACAS), maintenance programs, lifecycle analysis, end-of-life analysis and industrial approach for reliability; concepts and topics will be covered through real-life case studies. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken INDU 691 (Reliability and Maintenance for Design and Manufacturing) may not receive credit for this course.
INDU 6411 Human Factors Engineering (*) (4 credits)
Elements of anatomy, physiology and psychology; auditory and visual display engineering; engineering anthropometry; human capabilities and limitations; manual material handling: design of work places, human-machine system design; shift work and jet lag; acquisition and retention of skill; toxicity and hazard; human reliability. A project on a current topic is required.
Note: Students who have taken MECH 6251 may not receive credit for this course.
INDU 6421 Systems Safety Engineering and Management (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INDU 6310.
This course covers a variety of topics in safety engineering that provide the necessary knowledge and skills in order for engineers to design and manage systems where life-critical components will perform as expected, even when sub-components fail. Design concepts for safe operation with failure, design for human error and design for availability are introduced. Generic and safety dedicated engineering techniques are taught. Common safety management architectures for service and manufacturing systems, existing safety standards, guidelines in different industries, and their impact on the design processes across the life cycle of a product from initial concept to continuous certification are included. A project is required.
INDU 6521 Quantitative Methods in Healthcare Systems (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INDU 6121.
Topics include mathematical modeling and optimization methods in healthcare problems, healthcare staff planning and scheduling, operating room management, and appointment scheduling in clinics. Other operational issues such as production and delivery of radio-pharmaceuticals, resource allocation and capacity planning in hospitals, ambulance redeployment and dispatching are discussed. Finally, system-level healthcare planning and management tools and methods such as routing and scheduling of caregivers in home-health industries, healthcare facility location, inventory management of blood products, kidney exchange optimization and optimization in radiation therapy (intensity-modulated radiation - IMRT and volumetric modulated arc therapy - VMAT) are introduced. A project is required.
INDU 6611 Applied Industrial Systems Analytics (4 credits)
Prerequisites: INDU 6121,6310.
The course covers Analytics as it is divided into three categories according to functional classification of analytics methods: descriptive, predictive, and prescriptive. By taking  a hands-on teaching approach, graduate students are taught a set of techniques of descriptive and predictive analytics, which emphasizes extensive analysis of real (or realistic) data sets from a variety of organizations such as manufacturing, service and healthcare using statistical packages. Students are also taught techniques for proper visualization and presentation of the results of their analysis. Specific analytics methods such as logistic regression, time series, decision trees, support vector machines, k-nearest neighbors, k-means are covered. A project is required.
INDU 6990 Industrial Engineering Capstone (9 credits)
Prerequisite: A minimum of 16 credits must be completed in the program.
A supervised design, simulation or experimental capstone design project in the students’ area of specialization. Students may work in groups to undertake:
A project with a company, governmental organization, or a NGO, supervised jointly by a faculty member and a member of the partner organization;
An engineering design that has potential to be commercialized, where a faculty member or District 3 representative supervises the project.
Students may also opt to tackle a research problem under the supervision of a faculty member.
A written report and a public presentation is required. Final report must include a detailed description of the industry experience or the research problem and clearly outline the engineering analysis. This is a two-term course (Fall and Winter only).
Note: Students cannot take this course for credit towards MASc or PhD degrees.
INDU 6991 Engineering Management Industrial Stage I (8 Credits)
Prerequisite: A minimum of 16 credits must be completed in the program.
The Industrial Stage I is designed to provide students with the opportunity to complete an engineering management project in a company, governmental organization, or a NGO under the supervision of an organization partner and a faculty member. Students are required to provide a written report and give a seminar.
Note: Students cannot take this course for credit towards MASc or PhD degrees.
INDU 6992 Engineering Management Industrial Stage II (8 Credits)
Prerequisite: INDU 6991.
The Industrial Stage II is designed to provide students with the additional opportunity to complete the second engineering management project in a company, governmental organization, or a NGO under the supervision of an organization partner and a faculty member. Students are required to provide a written report and give a seminar.
Note: Students cannot take this course for credit towards MASc or PhD degrees.
MECH 6011 Analysis and Design of Pneumatic Systems (4 credits)
Principles and operating characteristics of fluidic elements; modelling of wall attachment; beam deflection; turbulent and vortex amplifiers; design and analysis of microdiaphram and diaphram ejector amplifiers; methods of evaluation performance characteristics of fluid devices; passive fluidic elements; digital and analog fluidic circuit theories and their applications; case studies of fluidic systems. A project on selected topics is required.
MECH 6021 Design of Industrial Control Systems (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6101 or equivalent.
Analog and digital control system design. Analog controller design methods: lead and lag compensators, pole placement, model matching, two-parameter configuration, plant input/output feedback configuration. Introduction to state-space control system. State estimator and state feedback. Introduction to digital control system. Z-transform. Difference equations. Stability in the Z-domain. Digital implementation of analog controllers. Equivalent digital plant method. Alias signals. Selection of sampling time. PID controller. A project on specific topic or applications is required.
MECH 6041 Virtual Systems Engineering (4 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the instructor.
Theory and application of virtual systems with an emphasis on virtual prototyping of mechanical systems. Virtual system modelling: particle systems, rigid body systems, lumped parameter models, and multi-domain system modelling. Non-real-time simulation methods: numerical integration methods, stiff systems and implicit methods. Hardware-in-the-loop simulation (HIL): Real-time simulation, multi-rate simulation and scheduling. Stability, invariance, and robustness. Virtual environments. Distributed simulation and time delay analysis. Design and analysis of virtual engineering systems: specification, design, verification, validation and prototype testing. A project is required.
MECH 6051 Process Dynamics and Control (*) (4 credits)
Dynamics of mechanical and chemical processes: linear and nonlinear system capacity, resistance, piping complexes; characteristics and dynamics of control valves; process time constants; proportional, reset and derivative control actions; feed forward and cascade control, direct digital control case studies on design of level control; p-4 control and heat exchanger control; analysis of industrial hazards and security. A project on selected topics of current interest is required.
MECH 6061 Analysis and Design of Hydraulic Control Systems (*) (4 credits)
Introduction to fluid power control technology; fundamentals of fluid transmission media; basic hydraulic control system components and circuits; hydraulic servosystems; modelling and dynamic analysis of hydraulic systems – design examples; basic pneumatic control system components and circuits – design examples. A projects on selected topics is required.
MECH 6081 Fuel Control Systems for Combustion Engines (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6201.
Introduction to fuel control systems for combustion engines with fuel injection. Dynamics of fuel injection for steady-state and transient process; injection characteristics for different combustion patterns; speed and power control in relation to engine characteristics; design principles of fuel systems; special requirements for starting, shut-down, schedule modulation; testing methods; wear and reliability problems. Case studies include: multicylinder in-line injection pump, rotary distributor injection pump, mecano-pneumatic fuel control unit. Full term project work on alternative fuel delivery systems and emissions control for combustion engines. Modelling and simulation. Demonstration of alternative fuel injection system on diesel engine in lab.
MECH 6091 Flight Control Systems (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6101 or equivalent.
Basics of flight dynamics modelling: axes systems and notation; equations of motion; aerodynamic forces and moments, airplane stability, aircraft on the ground; simulator flight model design. Flight instruments: classification; principles of operation, cockpit displays. Flight controls basics: configuration; control forces; primary and secondary controls. Introduction to automatic flight control: stability augmentation; autopilots; flight guidance and flight management systems; design examples. Flight simulation: classification; standards and regulations; system configuration and components. Projects on selected topics are required.
MECH 6101 Kinetic Theory of Gases (4 credits)
Equations of state for gases; molecular explanation of equations of state; introduction to quantum mechanics; the molecular theory of thermal energy and heat capacity; molecular velocity distribution, molecular collisions and the transport properties of gases, introduction to chemical kinetics. A project on specific topic or applications is required.
MECH 6111 Gas Dynamics (*) (4 credits)
Combined effects in one-dimensional flow; multidimensional flow; method of characteristics; one-dimensional treatment of non-steady gas dynamics; shock wave interactions; instability phenomena of supersonic intake diffusers; shock-boundary layer interactions. Projects on unsteady gas dynamics and on shock wave propagation and interactions are required.
MECH 6121 Aerodynamics (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6201.
Flow conservation equations, incompressible Navier-Stokes equations, inviscid irrotational and rotational flows: the Euler equations, the potential and stream function equations. Kelvin, Stokes and Helmholtz theorems. Elementary flows and their superposition, panel method for non-lifting bodies. Airfoil and wing characteristics, aerodynamics forces and moments coefficients. Flow around thin airfoils, Biot-Savart law, vortex sheets. Flow around thick airfoils, the panel method for lifting bodies. Flow around wings, Prandtl’s lifting line theory, induced angle and downwash, unswept wings, swept compressibility correction rules, the area rule. Transonic flow: small disturbance equation, full potential equation, supercritical airfoils. A project on specific topic or applications is required.
MECH 6131 Conduction and Radiation Heat Transfer (4 credits)
Solutions by analytical, numerical, and analogue methods of steady and transient temperature fields with and without heat sources; introduction to convection. Basic concepts and relations of radiation heat transfer, radiation of strongly absorbing media, and radiation of weakly absorbing media. A project on selected topics is required.
MECH 6141 Heat Exchanger Design (4 credits)
Review of heat transfer and flow losses; design consideration of heat exchangers; double pipe exchanger; shell and tube exchanger; extended surfaces; condenser, evaporator, regenerator, cooling tower. A project on selected topics is required.
MECH 6161 Gas Turbine Design (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: MECH 6171.
Study of practical criteria which influence the design of a gas turbine engine including relevant mechanical and aerodynamic constraints. The aerodynamics of each of the three major components of a modern turbo-fan engine, namely the compressor, the combustor and the turbine is considered. Air system acoustics, engine aerodynamic matching of components and modern performance testing methods. A design project is assigned for each of these components. A project on specific topic or applications is required.
MECH 6171 Turbomachinery and Propulsion (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6201.
Review of the gas turbine engine cycle and components arrangement. Types of turbo-propulsion for aircraft: turboprop, turbofan and turbojet. Energy transfer in incompressible and compressible turbomachines: the Euler equation, velocity triangles. Axial-flow compressors; mean-line analysis. Mechanisms of losses in turbomachines. Three-dimensional motion in turbomachines; the radial equilibrium equation and its numerical solution by finite difference methods. Dimensional analysis of incompressible and compressible flow in turbomachines, compressor and turbine performance maps; surge and stall. Centrifugal compressors. Axial-flow turbines. Prediction of performance of gas turbines, components matching. Projects on selected topics are required.
MECH 6181 Heating, Air Conditioning and Ventilation (*) (4 credits)
The effect of air temperature, humidity and purity on physiological comfort; overall heat transmission coefficients of building sections, air infiltration, ventilation and solar radiation loads; heating and air conditioning load calculations; heating, air conditioning and ventilating systems, equipment and controls; design of hot water piping and air distribution systems, pressure drop calculations; selection and specifications of mechanical equipment for heating, ventilation and air conditioning applications. A project on selected applications is required.
MECH 6191 Combustion (4 credits)
Prerequisite: MECH 6111.
Chemical thermodynamics; review of chemical kinetics; conservation equations for multicomponent reacting systems; detonation and deflagration of premixed materials; premixed laminar flames; gaseous diffusion flames, droplet combustion; turbulent flames; two-phase reacting systems; chemically reacting boundary layers. Projects on selected topics are required.
MECH 6231 Helicopter Flight Dynamics (4 credits)
Prerequisites: ENGR 6311 and MECH 6121, previously or concurrently.
Fundamental aspects of helicopter technology; rotary wing aerodynamics; aeromechanical stability; hover and forward flight performance; ground and air resonance; introduction to vibration and structural dynamic problems in helicopter; case studies in the rotorcraft field. Case studies and projects on selected topics are required.
MECH 6241 Operational Performance of Aircraft (4 credits)
Prerequisite: MECH 6121.
Introduction to fixed-wing aircraft operation. Flying environment and its measurement by aircraft instrumentation. Computation of lift and drag, effects of viscosity and compressibility. Review of piston, turboprop, turbojet and turbofan powerplants. Operational performance of aircraft in climb, cruise, descent and on ground. Advanced aircraft systems. Operational considerations in aircraft design. Projects on selected topics are required.
MECH 6251 Space Flight Mechanics and Propulsion Systems (4 credits)
Prerequisite: MECH 6111 or permission of the instructor.
Classification of space propulsion systems; Tsiolkovskij’s equation; ideal rocket and nozzle design; flight performance; basic orbital mechanics; chemical propellant rocket performance analysis; fundamentals of liquid and solid propellant rocket motors; electric, solar, fusion thruster. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken MECH 7221 may not receive credit for this course.
MECH 6301 Vibration Problems in Rotating Machinery (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6311.
Torsional vibrations critical speeds, rotors driven by reciprocating machines, finite element modelling, whirling of shafts, gyroscopic effects, rotors on fluid film bearings, instability in torsional and bending vibrations, balancing, response to support excitations, condition monitoring. Projects on selected applications are required.
MECH 6311 Noise and Vibration Control (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6311.
Introduction to noise and vibration, measurement units. Review of wave theory, noise control criteria and standards, sources and nature of mechanical equipment noise, devices for noise control such as silencers, baffles and acoustic enclosures. Machinery vibration sources, radiation of noise from vibrating structures, devices and methods for vibration control such as isolators, dampers, absorbers and in-situ balancing. Active control of noise and vibration. Projects on selected applications are required.
MECH 6321 Optimum Design of Mechanical Systems (4 credits)
Survey of practical methods for optimum design of mechanical systems; optimal performance criteria and selection of design variables. Introduction to analytical and numerical optimization methods for single- and multi-variable unconstrained problems: direct search and gradient methods. Constrained optimization. Optimality criterion techniques for mechanical systems. Case studies in the area of machine tools, structural systems, machine element design, vehicle design, and hydraulic control systems. Discussion on commercial software packages, their capability, availability and limitations. An optimization project on selected topics is required.
MECH 6341 Engineering Analysis of Smart Materials and Structures (4 credits)
Topics include introduction to smart materials and structures; overview of mathematical models for mechanical and electrical systems; mathematical representation of smart systems; piezoelectric materials and their constitutive equations; electromechanical coupling in piezoelectric based systems and structures and their governing equations; shape memory alloys and their constitutive models; electrical activation of shape memory alloys and their dynamic modelling; electrorheological (ER) and magnetorheological (MR) fluids and elastomers; constitutive models for ER and MR fluids and elastomers; dynamic modelling and vibration analysis of ER and MR based adaptive devices and structures; application of smart materials as energy dissipating elements in structural systems for passive, semi-active and active vibration control; application of smart materials in motion control. A project is required.
MECH 6351 Modal Analysis of Mechanical Systems (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6311.
Natural frequencies and normal modes of multi-degree-of-freedom systems; orthogonality of normal modes; eigenvalue and eigenvector extraction methods; vibration response using normal mode analysis; complex natural frequencies and complex modes in damped systems, modal damping random response considerations; nonsymmetric systems using biorthogonality relations; modal parameter identification from tests, application of modal analysis to mechanical systems. Projects on selected applications are required.
MECH 6361 Mechanics of Biological Tissues (4 credits)
The course deals with mechanical behaviour of tissues in human body such as bone, cartilage, ligaments, tendons, blood vessels, muscles, skin, teeth, nerves. Classification of biological tissues; mechanical properties in vivo and in vitro testing; constitutive relationships, viscoelastic behaviour and rate/time dependency; remodelling and adaption due to mechanical loading; analogous mechanical systems. A project on current topic is required.
MECH 6421 Metal Machining and Surface Technology (4 credits)
Theoretical and practical aspects of mechanics and dynamics of metal machining; tool geometry in machine and working reference systems with their transformation matrices; machinability; wear; cutting forces; temperature distribution; tool material unconventional machining; machining economics; optimizing techniques for cutting conditions; surface mechanics and application of random processes. A project on selected topics is required.
MECH 6431 Introduction to Tribology (Wear, Friction and Lubrication) (4 credits)
Contact between stationary surfaces; dry friction; rolling contract; wear; boundary lubrication; lubricating oils and greases; hydrodynamic journal bearings; case studies in Tribology as applied to design and manufacturing problems. A project on specific topic or applications is required.
MECH 6441 Stress Analysis in Mechanical Design (4 credits)
Stress analysis for design of elastic and visco-elastic mechanical components subject to thermal, fatigue, vibrational and chemical environments; buckling and creep; cumulative damage. Case studies, and project from selected applications are required.
MECH 6451 Computer-Aided Mechanical Design (4 credits)
Concept of value and decision theory in design; design application and case studies in the implementation of digital computer-oriented design of engineering systems. Examples include design of specific machine elements, design of vehicle suspension, hydraulic positioning systems, ship propulsion system, multi-speed gear box, and cam drives. Introduction to identification, optimization, and parameter sensitivity. Implementation of these methods uses remote terminals and graphic display units. A project is required.
MECH 6471 Aircraft Structures (4 credits)
Prerequisite: MECH 6441 or equivalent.
Aero/performance aspects of aircraft structures; Airworthiness and design considerations; Materials; Static, vibratory and aeroelastic loadings; Propulsion-induced loadings; Functions and fabrication of structural components; Stress analysis of wings, fuselages, stringers, fuselage frames, wing ribs, cut-outs in wings and fuselages, and laminated structures; Buckling of aircraft structures: local buckling, instability of stiffened panels; flexural-torsional buckling; Fracture and fatigue failures. Case studies.
MECH 6481 Aeroelasticity (*) (4 credits)
Aerodynamic loading of elastic airfoils; phenomenon of divergence; effect of flexible control surface on divergence of main structure; divergence of one- and two-dimensional wing models; phenomenon of flutter; flutter of two- and three-dimensional wings; approximate analysis techniques; flutter prevention and control; panel flutter in high speed vehicles; flutter of turbomachine bladings; vortex induced oscillations; bridge buffeting. A project on specific applications is required.
MECH 6491 Engineering Metrology and Measurement Systems (4 credits)
Introduction to metrology, linear and geometric tolerancing, non-optical and optical methods in form measurement, fundamentals of optical metrology, interferometry - theory and overview, Moiré and phase shifting interfereometry, speckle interferometry and holography, light sources, detectors and imaging systems. Applications to precision measurement, Doppler vibrometry and dynamic characterization, applications to MEMS (Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems), and special topics include: nanometrology, X-ray interferometry and interference spectroscopy. A project is required.
MECH 6501 Advanced Materials (4 credits)
Advanced composites. Polymer matrix composites. Resins and fibers. Metal matrix composites. Ceramic matrix composites. Interfaces. Mechanical properties. Applications. A project on selected topics of current interest is required.
MECH 6511 Mechanical Forming of Metals (*) (4 credits)
Mechanisms of plastic deformation at ambient and elevated temperatures; plasticity theory; mechanical forming processes; forging; rolling; extrusion; wire drawing; deep drawing; bending; results of processing; mechanical properties; residual stresses; fibrous textures and preferred orientations; effects of annealing. Process modelling by shearline or finite element analysis. A project on current research topics and selected applications is required.
MECH 6521 Manufacturing of Composites (*) (4 credits)
Hand lay-up. Autoclave curing. Compression molding. Filament winding. Resin transfer molding. Braiding. Injection molding. Cutting. Joining. Thermoset and thermoplastic composites. Process modelling and computer simulation. Nondestructive evaluation techniques. A project on selected topics of current interest is required.
MECH 6531 Casting (4 credits)
Phase equilibrium diagrams; mechanisms of solidification; design of castings for various moulding processes, section sizes, dimensional accuracies and surface finishes; continuous casting; control of grain size; segregation and porosity. Defects in castings. A project on current research topic and selected applications is required.
MECH 6541 Joining Processes and Nondestructive Testing (4 credits)
Principles of joining; fusion welding; arc, torch, plasma, electron beam, resistance, etc; solid state welding; heterogeneous hot joining (brazing, soldering); heterogeneous cold joining; metallurgy of joints; joint properties; nondestructive testing processes; radiography, ultrasonic, magnetic particle, die penetrant, etc. A project on current research topic or selected applications is required.
MECH 6551 Fracture (4 credits)
Fracture mechanisms; ductile and cleavage; brittle fracture; notch effects; propagation of cracks; ductile-brittle transition; inter-granular fracture; hydrogen embrittlement; fatigue initiation mechanisms; crack propagation; preventive design; creep failure, mechanisms maps, fatigue; pore formation; grain boundary sliding; high temperature alloys, testing techniques; fractography. A project on current research topics and selected applications is required.
MECH 6561 High Strength Materials (4 credits)
Studies of the microstructures responsible for high strength and of the thermomechanical treatments producing these microstructures; dislocation theory; strain hardening; strengthening by solid-solution, massive hard phases, precipitation, dispersed particles, and martensitic and bainitic structures; fibre and particulate composites; surface treatments; residual stresses of thermal or mechanical origin. A project on current research topics and selected applications is required.
MECH 6571 Corrosion and Oxidation of Metals (4 credits)
Electrochemical corrosion and preventative measures. Stress corrosion, corrosion fatigue. Oxidation at low and high temperatures and protective measures. Selection of alloys and coatings. A project on current research topic or selected applications is required.
MECH 6581 Mechanical Behaviour of Polymer Composite Materials (*) (4 credits)
General applications of polymer composite materials in the aircraft, aerospace, automobile, marine, recreational and chemical processing industries. Different fibres and resins. Mechanics of a unidirectional lamina. Transformation of stress, strain, modulus and compliance. Off-axis engineering constants, shear and normal coupling coefficients. In-plane and flexural stiffness and compliance of different laminates including cross-ply, angle-ply, quasi-isotropic and general bidirectional laminates. Strength of laminates and failure criteria. Micro-mechanics. Projects on selected applications are required.
MECH 6601 Testing and Evaluation of Polymer Composite Materials and Structures (4 credits)
Theory and practice for the determination of tensile, compression and shear properties of composite materials; techniques for the determination of physical and chemical properties; non-destructive techniques such as ultrasonics, acousto-ultrasonics, acoustic emission, infrared and lasers for evaluation of composite structures. A project on selected topics of current interest is required.
MECH 6611 Numerically Controlled Machines (4 credits)
Prerequisite: MECH 6451 or equivalent.
Positioning and contouring NC machines, typical NC applications; analysis of typical NC systems and design considerations; components. A design project on multi-surface machine parts is required.
MECH 6621 Microprocessors and Applications (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: A course in industrial electronics or permission of the instructor.
Introduction to the concepts and practices of using microprocessors and micro-computers in such applications as instrumentation, manufacturing, control and automation; architecture and programming techniques; interface logic circuits; I/O systems; case studies of mechanical engineering applications. A project on specific topic or applications is required.
MECH 6631 Industrial Automation (4 credits)
Introduction to mechanization of industrial processes such as machining, material handling, assembling, and quality control; selection of actuators and sensors for mechanization; design of sequential control circuits using classical methods, ladder diagram, travel-step diagram and cascade method; specifying control sequences using GRAFCET and FUP; special purpose circuits such as emergency circuits, timers, and programmable logic controllers (PLCs); case studies dealing with typical industrial manufacturing processes and computer simulation. A project on specific topic or applications is required.
MECH 6641 Engineering Fracture Mechanics and Fatigue (4 credits)
Fracture mechanics and fatigue of machine elements and structures; Linear Elastic Fracture Mechanics (LEFM); Elastic Plastic Fracture Mechanics (EPFM); Finite Element Analysis for fracture; LEFM and EPFM Testing; Fracture mechanics approach to fatigue crack growth problem; Constant-amplitude, variable-amplitude and stochastic loading cases; Industrial applications to mechanical design and fracture and fatigue control in machine elements and structures; Damage tolerance design. A case study or project on selected applications is required.
MECH 6651 Structural Composites (4 credits)
Analysis for design of beams, columns, rods, plates, sandwich panels and shells made of composites; anisotropic elasticity; energy methods; vibration and buckling; local buckling in sandwich structures; free edge effects and delamination; joining; and failure considerations in design. A project on selected applications is required.
MECH 6661 Thermodynamics and Phase Equilibria of Materials (4 credits)
Thermodynamic laws and relationships. Partial and relative state functions: Activities in multicomponent systems, reference and standard states, solution thermodynamics. Thermodynamics of phase transformations and chemical reactions in engineering materials. Calculation of thermodynamic functions and properties. Experimental methods of determining thermodynamic properties. Multicomponent and multiphasic systems. Generalized phase rules, phase diagrams, stability diagrams and other diagram types. Computational thermodynamics for developing engineering materials. A project is required.
MECH 6671 Finite Element Method in Machine Design (4 credits)
Prerequisite: MECH 6441.
Role of Finite element method in machine design. Variational principles. Formulation of the finite element problem in stress, vibration and buckling analyses of machine components. Different elements and interpolation functions. Application in machine design; fracture. A case study or project on selected applications is required.
MECH 6681 Dynamics and Control of Nonholonomic Systems (4 credits)
Kinematics of nonholonomic systems; dynamics of nonholonomic systems, including d’Álembert principle, Euler-Lagrange equations; equations of motion of nonholonomic systems with Lagrangian multipliers; the reaction of ideal nonholonomic constraints; nonholonomic Caplygin systems; Bifurcation and stability analysis of the nonholonomic systems. Analysis and design of nonlinear control of nonholonomic systems, including kinematic control and dynamic control as well as force control. Controller designs with uncertain nonholonomic systems. Application examples including control of wheeled mobile robots and walking robots. A project is required.
MECH 6691 Optical Microsystems (4 credits)
Microfabrication and micromachining required for optical microsystems; optical microsystem modelling, simulation, sensitivity analysis. Properties of materials suitable for optical MEMS (Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems). Measurements, sensing and actuation suitable for optical microsystems. Introduction to micro-optical components; optical waveguide-based systems. Design of different optical MEMS devices. Chemical and biochemical sensing with optical microsystems. Assembly, packaging and testing of optical MEMS devices. A project is required.
MECH 6741 Mechatronics (*) (4 credits)
Introduction to mechatronics; basic elements of mechatronic systems. Measurement systems: including principles of measurement systems; sensors and transducers; signal conditioning processes and circuits; filters and data acquisition. Actuation systems: mechanical actuation systems and electrical actuation systems. Controllers: control modes; PID controller; performance measures; introduction to digital controllers and robust control. Modelling and analysis of mechatronic systems; performance measures; frequency response; transient response analysis; stability analysis. A project is required.
MECH 6751 Vehicle Dynamics (*) (4 credits)
Tire-terrain interactions; side-slip; cornering and aligning properties of tires: camber angle and camber torque; estimation of braking-tractive and cornering forces of tires; steady-state handling of road vehicles: steering response and directional stability; handling and directional response of vehicles with multiple steerable axles: handling of articulated vehicles: handling and directional response of tracked and wheeled off-road vehicles; directional response to simultaneous braking and steering. A project on research topics is required.
MECH 6761 Vehicular Internal Combustion Engines (*) (4 credits)
Mechanical design of vehicular engines; gas exchange and combustion engine processes; combustion chambers design; fuels and fuel supply; ignition and control systems; cooling and lubrication of engines; emissions formation and control; engine operational characteristics - matching with vehicles; enhancement of engine performance; engine testing; environmental impact of vehicular engines; recent developments in energy-efficient and “clean” engines. Design of calculation project of vehicular engine. Project work on alternative fuel delivering systems and emissions control for combusion engines. Modelling and simulation. Demonstration of alternative fuel injection system on diesel engine in lab.
MECH 6771 Driverless Ground Vehicles (*) (4 credits)
Definition and classifications; case studies of major industrial and research vehicle prototypes; applications; kinematic modelling for feedback control of a driverless vehicle as a planar rigid body; vehicle motion and its relation to steering and drive rates of its wheels; co-ordinate systems assignment; transformation matrices; condition for rolling without skidding and sliding; sensor models and sensor integrations; dead-reckoning control; global and local path planning; introduction to dynamic modelling of driverless vehicle with and without the dynamics of wheel assemblies; design of optimal controllers; introduction to adaptive neuro-morphic controller. Projects are an integral part of the course for which the following may be used: TUTSIM, FORTRAM, or C. A project on selected topics is required.
MECH 6781 Guided Vehicle Systems (*) (4 credits)
Definition and classification of guided transportation systems; track characterization: alignment, gage, profile and cross-level irregularities; wheel-rail interactions: rolling contact theories, creep forces; modelling of guided vehicle components; wheelset, suspension, truck and car body configurations, suspension characteristics; performance evaluation: stability/hunting, ride quality; introduction to advanced guided vehicles. A project on selected topics is an integral part of the course.
MECH 6791 Aircraft Hydro-Mechanical and Fuel Systems (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6201.
This course focuses on design principles and sizing of the following aircraft systems: hydraulic system, primary and secondary flight control actuation systems, landing gear systems, and fuel system. Traditional and new technology implementations in aircraft, helicopters and other aerospace vehicles are considered. Associated standards and regulations are described. Principles of architecture development and integration, as well as engineering tools for system sizing and simulation are covered. A project is required.
MECH 6891 Aircraft Pneumatic and Electrical Power Systems (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6201.
This course focuses on design principles and sizing of the following aircraft systems: electrical power system, auxiliary and emergency power systems, environmental control system, ice and rain protection system, and pneumatic power system. Traditional and new technology implementations in aircraft, helicopters and other aerospace vehicles are considered. Associated standards and regulations are described. Principles of architecture development and integration, as well as engineering tools for system sizing and simulation are covered. A project is required, including a laboratory component.
MECH 691 Topics in Mechanical Engineering I (4 credits)
See Note in Topic Area E02
MECH 6941 Concurrent Engineering in Aerospace Systems (4 credits)
Introduction: objectives, definitions, impact on product development; process modelling and optimization; forming of engineering team; selection of techniques, methodology and tools; market design focus vs. quality design focus; development time management; process integration; aerospace case studies/projects, future trends.
MECH 6961 Aerospace Case Study I
See Mechanical & Industrial Engineering section.
MECH 6971 Aerospace Case Study II
See Mechanical & Industrial Engineering section.
Note: MECH 6961 and MECH 6971 are restricted to students registered in aerospace engineering programs at Concordia or participating universities. These courses cover topical case studies drawn from aerospace industrial experience. They are conducted in a modular form by experienced engineers who specialize in one or more facets of this industry. They are given in collaboration with the other participating universities and may be conducted at any of the Montreal universities in the language of convenience to the instructor.
MECH 7011 Dynamics of Hydraulic Control Systems (4 credits)
Prerequisites: MECH 6021, 6061.
Review of hydraulic control system technology and the need for dynamic analyses. Conventional techniques for assuring good response by analysis. Power flow modelling, power bond graphs, and digital simulation techniques. Obtaining dynamic relationships and coefficients. Phenomena which can affect dynamic response. Projects on selected topics are required.
MECH 7101 Convection Heat Transfer (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6201.
Heat transfer in laminar flow, review of the differential and integral forms of the general energy equation for boundary layer regimes; solution of the energy equation for free convection, forced convection and heat transfer in entrance regions. Heat transfer in turbulent flow; review of the energy equation for turbulent flow; momentum-heat transfer analogies; experimental results for forced convection, free convection, and combined free and forced convection. Project or term paper required.
MECH 7501 Design Using Composite Materials (4 credits)
Prerequisite: MECH 6581.
General concept involving design using composite materials. Integral approach to design. Selection of materials. Selection of fabrication techniques. Computer-aided design tools. Consideration for fracture, fatigue, buckling and impact. Joining consideration. Design of tubes, beams, columns. Design of aircraft components. A project on selected topics is required.
MECH 7511 Vehicle Vibration and Control (4 credits)
Dynamic modelling of ground vehicles for analysis of ride performance; ride comfort and safety criteria; modelling of human body; characterization of road inputs; modelling and design of vibration isolators: primary suspension, secondary suspension; active, semi-active and passive isolators; kinematic and dynamic analysis of suspension linkages; laboratory methods for performance evaluation of vehicle suspension systems; software packages and case studies. Projects on selected applications are required.
MECH 7711 Handling and Stability of Road Vehicles (4 credits)
Prerequisite: MECH 6751 or equivalent.
Mathematical methods in vehicle dynamics; tire and suspension modelling and design for handling; static roll; steady turning and off-tracking analysis of straight and articulated road vehicles; directional stability and braking analysis; directional response of articulated vehicles with steerable axles; software packages and case studies. Project on selected topics is an integral part of the course.
MECH 791 Topics in Mechanical Engineering II (4 credits)
See Note in Topic Area E02
MECH 8011 Doctoral Seminar in Mechanical Engineering (***)
Grading on a pass/fail basis only. No credit value.
ENGR 8901 Master of Applied Science Research and Thesis (29 credits)
ENGR 8911 Doctoral Research and Thesis
INSE 8901 Master of Applied Science Research and Thesis (25 credits)
E63 - PROJECT, REPORT AND INDUSTRIAL TRAINING
ENCS 6931 Industrial Stage and Training
ELEC 6961 Graduate Seminar in Electrical and Computer Engineering
INSE 6961 Graduate Seminar in Information and Systems Engineering
ENGR 692 Case Study and Report
ENGR 6971 Project and Report I
ENGR 6981 Project and Report II
ENGR 6991 Project and Report III
INDU 6990 Industrial Engineering Capstone
INDU 6991 Engineering Management Industrial Stage I
INDU 6992 Engineering Management Industrial Stage II
E66 - SYSTEMS ENGINEERING
INSE 6311 Sustainable Infrastructure Planning and Management Systems
INSE 6400 Principles of Systems Engineering
INSE 6411 Product Design Theory and Methodology
INSE 6421 Systems Integration and Testing
INSE 6431 Ad Hoc Wireless Networks: Architectures and Protocols
E67 - 3D GRAPHICS AND INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
INSE 6510 Video Game Technology and Development
INSE 6530 3D Graphics and Computer Animation for Game Design
E68 - QUALITY SYSTEMS ENGINEERING
INSE 6210 Total Quality Methodologies in Engineering
INSE 6220 Advanced Statistical Approaches to Quality
INSE 6230 Total Quality Project Management
INSE 6240 Executive Communication
INSE 6250 Quality Methodologies for Software
INSE 6260 Software Quality Assurance
INSE 6270 Quality-Based Systems Engineering
INSE 6280 Quality Assurance for Systems Engineering
INSE 6290 Quality in Supply Chain Design
INSE 6300 Quality Assurance in Supply Chain Management
INSE 6310 Systems Engineering Maintenance Management
E69 - INFORMATION SYSTEMS SECURITY
INSE 6110 Foundations of Cryptography
INSE 6120 Crypto-Protocol and Network Security
INSE 6130 Operating Systems Security
INSE 6140 Malware Defenses and Application Security
INSE 6150 Security Evaluation Methodologies
INSE 6160 Database Security and Privacy
INSE 6170 Network Security Architecture and Management
INSE 6180 Security and Privacy Implications of Data Mining
INSE 6190 Wireless Network Security
INSE 6610 Cybercrime Investigations
INSE 6620 Cloud Computing Security and Privacy
INSE 6630 Recent Developments in Information Systems Security
INSE 6640 Smart Grids and Control System Security
INSE 6650 Trusted Computing
INSE 6660 Secure Programming
INSE 6670 Embedded Systems Security
INSE 6680 Systems Physical Security
E70 - INFORMATION SYSTEMS ENGINEERING
INSE 6100 Advanced Java Platforms
INSE 6320 Risk Analysis for Information and Systems Engineering
INSE 6441 Applied Game Theory and Mechanism Design
INSE 7100 Design and Analysis of Security Protocols
INSE 7110 Value Added Service Engineering in Next Generation Networks
INSE 7120 Advanced Network Management
E71 - COMPUTER SCIENCE
See courses listed for Topic Areas C01 to C07 in Computer Science and Software Engineering Section.
E72 - BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION PROGRAM
MBA 607 Financial Accounting for Managerial Decisions
MBA 608 Managerial Statistics
MBA 614 Financial Management
MBA 616 Operations Management
MBA 628 Management Accounting
E73 - SOFTWARE ENGINEERING
See courses listed for Topic Areas C08 to C13 in Computer Science and Software Engineering Section.
F03 - APPLICATION SPECIFIC INTEGRATED CIRCUITS
COEN 6501 Digital System Design and Synthesis
COEN 6511 VLSI Circuit Design
COEN 6521 Design for Testability
COEN 6531 ASIC Synthesis
COEN 6541 Functional Hardware Verification
COEN 6551 Formal Hardware Verification
ELEC 6051 Introduction to Analog VLSI
ELEC 6071 Mixed-Signal VLSI for Communication Systems (*)
ELEC 6081 Modern Analog Filter Design
(*) Cross-listed courses
(***) Available only to students admitted prior to September 1997.
(****) Students admitted prior to September 1997 are not allowed to substitute ENCS 8011 for an equivalent course work.
Course Descriptions
Building Engineering
BCEE 6961 Graduate Seminar in Building and Civil Engineering (1 credit)
MEng students must attend a set of seminars identified by the Department and submit a comprehensive report on selected topics. The report, including an abstract, must be suitably documented and illustrated, should be at least 1000 words in length, must be type-written on one side of 21.5 cm by 28 cm white paper of quality, and must be enclosed in binding. Students are referred to Form and Style: Thesis, Reports, Term Papers, fourth edition by Campbell and Ballou, published by Houghton Mifflin.
Note: This course cannot be taken by MASc or PhD students.
BLDG 6061 Structural Systems for Buildings (4 credits)
Building components and assembled systems. Structural efficiency and economy: rigid frames, shear walls, framed tube, latticed structures; membrane, air and cable supported structures. Selection and preliminary design of building structural systems, materials and components. Case studies.
BLDG 6071 Wind Engineering and Building Aerodynamics (4 credits)
Atmospheric circulations; atmospheric boundary layer; wind structure; wind speed and turbulence measurements; bluff body aerodynamics; mean and fluctuating wind forces on buildings; internal wind pressures; along-wind, across-wind and torsional building response to wind; snow drifting and accumulation problems; dispersion of gaseous pollutants. A case study or a project is required.
BLDG 6111 Computer-Aided Building Operation (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 6711.
Computer systems for energy management, including scheduling and operation of HVAC systems and lighting. Applications for intelligent buildings. Use of simulation and knowledge-based software for automatic regulation of building operation. Diagnosis of malfunctions and modifications of operations. Computerized building security systems. Actions during extraordinary conditions such as fire emergencies. A project is required.
BLDG 6151 Database Applications in Building and Civil Engineering (4 credits)
Components, properties and limits of databases and database management systems (DBMS). Database requirements for engineering tasks. Design of database schema and implementation in commercially available DBMS. Engineering data modelling techniques. Topics include: the entity/relationship model; the relational data model; the standard database language SQL; and the object-oriented data model. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken ENGR 6151 may not take this course for credit.
BLDG 6221 Design of Computer-Aided Systems in Building and Civil Engineering (4 credits)
Object-oriented modelling of physical components, design objectives, performance requirements and engineering processes. Identification of objects and definition of their arrangement and interaction to model engineering processes. Overview of the life-cycle of an engineering software project. Project on implementation of a small scale computer-aided engineering system.
Note: Students who have taken ENGR 6221 may not take this course for credit.
BLDG 6231 Applications of Artificial Intelligence in Building and Civil Engineering (4 credits)
Introduction to artificial intelligence techniques in an engineering context; heuristic search methods, logical reasoning, knowledge-based systems, neural networks, genetics algorithms, and case-based reasoning. Algorithmic versus knowledge-based programming for engineering applications. Emphasis on knowledge-based systems and their characteristics, capabilities and limitations. Case studies in design, failure diagnosis and processing of standards. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken ENGR 6231 may not take this course for credit.
BLDG 6241 Building Information Modelling in Construction (4 credits)
Topics include introduction to Building Information Modelling (BIM) technologies; BIM implementation at different project stages - pre-construction, construction, and facility management; BIM-Aided design alternatives, constructability analysis, and development of space-time-cost models; BIM visualization for trade coordination and processes monitoring. A project is required.
BLDG 6541 Heat Transfer (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the Bachelor of/Baccalaureate in Engineering (Building) Program).
Steady state heat conduction. Convection and radiation heat exchange. Refrigeration cycles. Theory of air vapour mixtures. Introduction to heat transfer in building environment. Unsteady state of heat transfer. Case studies.
BLDG 6561 Building Economics I (*) (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the Bachelor of/Baccalaureate in Engineering (Building) Program).
Development of economic performance measures of interest to developers, owners, contractors and users. Sources of finance and the determinants of the cost of money. Elementary estimating; cost indices; forecasting techniques; value of money; economic comparison techniques; evaluation of projects in private and public sectors; tax regulations; inflation; life-cycle costing; risk analysis; non-economic attributes. Case studies of economic analysis of projects, single building and building components. A project is required.
BLDG 6571 Project Management (4 credits)
Introduction to managing the development, design and construction of buildings. Examination of project management for the total development process, including inter-relationships between owners, developers, financing sources, designers, contractors and users; methods of project delivery; introduction to planning and scheduling; role and tasks of the project manager; feasibility analyses; construction claims; financing and cash-flow analysis; government regulations; environmental and social constraints; introduction to control of cost, time and technical performance; human factors; computer applications. A project is required.
BLDG 6581 Decision Analysis (4 credits)
Development of a basic theory of decision making under uncertainty. Rationales of decision makers, utility, the concept of the value of perfect information. The Bayesian approach to decision making; pre-posterior analysis and optimal fixed-sized analysis for random processes. Decision analysis with multiple objective, structuring the problem, multi-attributed utility functions, case studies. A project is required.
BLDG 6591 Computer-Aided Building Design (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisites: BLDG 6561.
Identification of objectives, decision variables, processes and information flow in building design. Application and evaluation of computer systems to components of the building design process. Determination of decision variables in problem modelling and sensitivity of results. Current applications in structural analysis and design, space layout, electrical distribution systems, HVAC design, lighting design, estimating, specification editing and scheduling. Evaluation of issues of interdisciplinary information control and interchange. A project is required.
BLDG 6601 Building Enclosure (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent).
Prerequisite: BLDG 6611.
Schematic and detail design of walls, windows and roofs. Complex building types will be examined to show the relationships between massing, materials, energy conservation and building use. Solar shading, daylighting, rainscreen and air barrier principles will be emphasized. A project is required.
BLDG 6611 Building Science (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the Bachelor of/Baccalaureate in Engineering (Building) Program).
Environmental exterior and interior influences on inner environmental control. Topics include: thermal energy exchanges, psychrometrics, vapour and fluid flow, air leakage, ventilation and design comfort conditions, selection of materials and building systems. A case study or a project is required.
BLDG 6621 Modern Building Materials (*) (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent).
Prerequisite: BLDG 6611 previously or concurrently.
Structural, thermal and acoustical properties of new building materials such as: plastics, synthetic fibres, adhesives, sealants, caulking compounds, forams, sandwich panels, composites, polymer-concrete systems, fibre-reinforced concretes, plastic mortars, polymers for flooring, roofing, synthetic wall papers. Consideration of corrosion, bio- and thermal degradation, stability under ultraviolet and solar radiation. A project is required.
BLDG 6631 Fundamentals of Facility Management (4 credits)
Systems approach to planning, organization and implementation of a facility, including space allocation, leasing and marketing, operation, maintenance, and renovation over the life of the building. Forecast of budget requirements for effective operation, maintenance, and renovation. Correlation between the operation of the building and health risks, comfort, productivity, and costs. Integrated approach to the planning, analysis, evaluation, organization and optimization of physical systems of facilities. Case studies.
BLDG 6641 Industrialized Building (4 credits)
Trends toward off-site fabrication of buildings. Needs and technical requirements of international markets. Principal types of industrialized systems, materials and components. Optimization of industrialized production. Planning, design, construction and maintenance. Codes and standards. A case study and project.
BLDG 6651 Fire and Smoke Control in Buildings (*) (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent).
Prerequisite: BLDG 6611.
Topics treated include: fire and smoke control; failure mechanisms of building enclosure, illustrated by case studies; performance codes for enclosure systems; enclosure design for extreme operation environments. A project is required.
BLDG 6661 Hydrothermal Performance of the Building Envelope (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 6611 previously or concurrently.
Modelling of dynamic building envelope thermal performance. Thermal bridges. Modelling of transient moisture transfer, condensation and accumulation. Advanced glazings and evaluation of window performance. Active building envelope components for heat and moisture control. Experimental techniques for performance evaluation of the building envelope; infrared thermography, guarded hot box and calibrated hot box tests. A project is required.
BLDG 6671 Diagnostics and Rehabilitation of Building Envelope (4 credits)
Failures in building envelopes. Modes of deterioration including freeze-thaw, chemical, movements. Diagnostics and investigation techniques including field survey instruments. Assessment of intervention magnitude and performance of proposed solutions. Codes, standards and regulations. Case studies.
BLDG 6701 Building Environment (4 credits)
Design criteria of indoor environment. Assessment of thermal comfort and sensation. Mathematical models of thermal comfort: predictive models and adaptive models. Prediction of thermal sensation using: computer simulation, and measurements with thermal comfort meter. Verification of compliance with standards. Visual comfort. Standards for quality of visual environment. Calculation of photometric parameters. Preliminary design of the indoor lighting system. Evaluation of illuminance level using commercially available software packages. Acoustical comfort. Standards for quality of acoustical environment. Sound control measures through the design of buildings and HVAC systems. Two projects.
BLDG 6711 Mechanical Systems in Building (4 credits)
Co-requisite: BLDG 6701.
HVAC Systems. Analysis, selection and operation; design of air and water distribution systems in buildings; waste water disposal and sprinkler systems. A project is required.
BLDG 6721 Building Acoustics (*) (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent).
An understanding of sound and an examination of the major factors which contribute to a controlled acoustic environment in buildings. Topics covered include: basic vibration, sources, measurement and description of environmental noise, psychological and physiological aspects of sound perception; sound transmission through building elements; reverberation, measurement and control; and room acoustics. Case studies and a project are required.
BLDG 6731 Building Illumination (*) (4 credits)
Quantitative and qualitative aspects of illumination systems. Photometric quantities, visual perception and colour theory, standards, daylight and artificial illumination systems, radiative transfer. Fixture and lamp characteristics, control devices for improved energy efficiency. Design of advanced fenestration systems for daylighting. Field measurements and artificial sky tests. Virtual reality and other computer simulation techniques for lighting. A project is required.
BLDG 6741 HVAC Control Systems (4 credits)
HVAC control loops: classification and structure, specifications, hardware, tuning and testing. Optimization of single- and multi-loop control systems. Energy management systems for monitoring, control and diagnostics of HVAC system operation. A project is required.
BLDG 6751 Indoor Air Quality and Ventilation (*) (4 credits)
History and development of indoor air science. Relevant national and provincial standards and regulations. Principles of occupational hygiene; identification, evaluation and control of physical, biological, and chemical agents in indoor environment. Ventilation requirements. Definition of ventilation efficiency and removal effectiveness; measurement techniques and modelling. Indoor air monitoring; field studies of gases, fumes, solvents, and dusts. Plan for building walkthrough evaluations; strategies for improving indoor air quality. Building design for acceptable indoor air quality, material selection and specification. A case study or project.
BLDG 6761 Intelligent Buildings (4 credits)
Issues related to the Intelligent Building; automation, communication and security. Mechanical, electrical, electronic subsystems and their integration within the building; configuration and operational characteristics; performance specifications; analytical models; design methods; case studies. A project is required.
BLDG 6781 Energy Management in Buildings (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 6611 previously or concurrently.
Energy-related standards, codes and by-laws. Methods of assessment of the actual energy performance. Conventional and innovative measurement and analysis techniques. Energy-oriented renovation or replacement of building sub-systems (e.g. HVAC and lighting systems). Prediction of energy and cost savings using commercially available software packages. Verification of compliance with standards. Life cycle analysis. A case study and project.
BLDG 6791 Thermal Building Simulation (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 6611.
Mathematical models of heat and mass transfer phenomena through building components: transfer function methods and numerical methods. Models of radiative and convective heat transfer phenomena within buildings. Application to equipment-based modelling of HVAC systems: first principle models and correlation-based models. System-based modelling of HVAC systems. Validation of computer models. A project is required.
BLDG 6801 Construction Planning and Control (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 6571.
Methods of delivering construction. Contractual relationships and organizational structures. Phases of project development. Estimating resource requirements; costs and durations. Bidding strategies. Network analysis using CPM and PERT, time-cost trade-off, resource allocation. Cash flow analysis. Earned-value concept for integrated time and cost control. Quality control. Value engineering. A case study and project.
Note: Students who have taken the undergraduate equivalent BCEE 465 may not take this course for credit.
BLDG 6811 Labour and Industrial Relations in Construction (*) (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent).
The study of labour legislation with special emphasis on the construction industry, union organization, the theory and practice of negotiations, mediation, contract administration and arbitration. Review of actual contracts, discussion of future trends. Case studies.
BLDG 6821 Legal Issues in Construction (*) (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent).
Legal concepts and processes applicable to the development of constructed facilities and to the operation of the construction firm. Emphasis on Quebec law and institutions. Case studies.
BLDG 6831 Construction Processes (*) (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent).
A study of current construction methods and techniques. The subjects include wood framing, masonry, concrete forming, slipforming, precast construction, industrialized building, deep excavation shoring and underpinning. The methods are described in terms of materials involved, equipment required, current field practice and safety considerations. Case studies.
BLDG 6851 Project Cost Estimating (*) (4 credits)
Techniques and procedures used for estimating cost of construction projects. Topics include: cost estimation process; elements of project cost; conceptual and detailed cost estimation methods; risk assessment and range estimating; case studies; computer-aided estimating. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken the undergraduate equivalent BCEE 464 may not take this course for credit.
BLDG 6861 Simulations and Design of Construction Operations (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 6831.
Principles of modelling and simulation. Classification and validation of simulation models. Analysis of input data and outputs. Object Oriented Simulation (OOS). Simulation languages. Application of discrete event simulation in construction operations including earthmoving operations, building construction operations, and tunneling operations. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken the undergraduate equivalent BCEE 466 may not take this course for credit.
BLDG 691 Topics in Building Engineering I (4 credits)
Note: Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for these courses, providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. CIVI 691A, CIVI 691B, etc.
BLDG 6921 Trenchless Technology for Rehabilitation Works (4 credits)
State of Canadian urban infrastructure with a focus on underground facilities; current industry practice; common types of defects in underground pipes; diagnostics of defects and evaluation techniques for the conditions of water and sewer mains; planning, equipment, materials and methods for rehabilitation of water and sewer mains; case studies.
Note: Students who have taken ENGR 6721 may not take this course for credit.
BLDG 6931 Infrastructure Rehabilitation (4 credits)
State of Canadian urban infrastructure. Rehabilitation techniques as applicable to steel and concrete structures; degradation mechanisms; detection and classification of defects. Evaluation and assessment of the conditions of buildings and bridges. Rehabilitation materials and methods. Codes and guidelines. Case studies.
Note: Students who have taken ENGR 6731 may not take this course for credit.
BLDG 6951 Solar Building Modelling and Design (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 6611 or permission of instructor.
Design principles of solar buildings, including direct gain, indirect gain and solaria. Net-zero energy solar buildings; analytical and numerical models. Performance of glazing systems, transparent insulation, and airflow windows. Building-integrated photovoltaic systems. Thermal storage sizing for solar energy storage; phase-change thermal storage. Thermosyphon collectors. Prevention of overheating, shading systems and natural ventilation. A project is required.
BLDG 7401 Dispersion of Building Exhaust (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 6611.
Atmospheric parameters, wind velocity profiles, meteorological data. Gaussian dispersion equations. Plume rise and trajectories. Evaluation of stack gas plume dispersion. Trapped plumes; Turner’s approximation. Potential reingestion of building exhaust. Analytical, numerical and experimental modelling of dispersion process; design guidelines fumigation. A case study or a project is required.
BLDG 7511 Integrated Building Design (4 credits)
Prerequisites: BLDG 6601 and BLDG 6711.
Compatibility among building subsystems (structural, envelope, mechanical, lighting, materials) and between the building and the environment. Integration issues in the design, production and operation of the built facility. Case studies of failures caused by lack of compatibility. Consideration for tolerances and sustainable development. A project is required.
BLDG 7521 Advanced Computer-Aided Building Design (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 6231.
Characteristics of the building design process. Traditional versus emerging roles of computers pertaining to building design activities. Preliminary design and integrated design issues: analysis with incomplete/imprecise data, automatic sizing and checking based on Standards, interfaces between CAD and analysis routines, communications across disciplines and through design stages, standardization. Applications involving operations research techniques, KBS and analysis packages for engineering performance evaluation. A project is required.
BLDG 7601 Durability of Building Materials (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 6611 or equivalent.
Concepts underlying long-term performance of building materials such as: ceramics, stucco and synthetic stucco, lightweight concrete, wood and wood-based products, thermal insulation, selected composite materials, sealants, membranes used for waterproofing and air barriers. Methods of fabrication, properties and evaluation for durability. Failure mechanisms under combined actions of mechanical and environmental loads (temperature, moisture, freeze-thaw, solar radiation, salt solutions, air pollution, and microorganisms). A case study and project.
BLDG 7811 Project Acquisition and Control (4 credits)
Prerequisites: BLDG 6571, 6801.
Study of techniques and procedures used for construction project procurement and control. Topics treated include: marketing, bidding strategies, work break-down structure and contract packages, techniques for integrated time and cost control; management information systems for control, procurement; productivity measurement, contingency and escalation analysis and control. A project is required.
BLDG 7831 Building Economics II (4 credits)
Prerequisites: BLDG 6561, 6581.
Topics include: replacement analysis; risk analysis of projects; sensitivity analysis; forecasting techniques, profitability analysis; multi-attributed decision analysis, case studies. A project is required.
BLDG 7841 Information Technology Applications in Construction (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 7811.
Use of computers in estimating, cost engineering, scheduling and resource analyses, materials control, report generation and operations simulation. Information systems: information-based theories of management; information technology, cost and value information; analysis, design and implementation of a network based control system. Considerations for computer usage in construction firms; hardware, software, operations, economic, human and organizational. Product and process modelling; Internet use in product delivery. A project is required.
BLDG 7861 Business Practices in Construction (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 6801.
A study of business practices as they relate to the construction industry. Topics treated include: organization; marketing; bid preparation; bonding; personnel management; financing; accounting; cash-flow analysis; capital budgeting. The principles are first presented and then followed by case studies. A project is required.
BLDG 7871 Construction Equipment Management (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 6561.
The study of various classes of equipment, (cranes, excavators, loaders, tractors, etc.) used in construction. Methods are developed for selecting, acquiring, maintaining and replacing equipment. Treatment of simulation and its use for the optimal selection of equipment spreads. A project is required.
BLDG 791 Topics in Building Engineering II (4 credits)
Note: Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for these courses, providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. CIVI 691A, CIVI 691B, etc.
BLDG 8011 Doctoral Seminar in Building Engineering (***)
Grading on a pass/fail basis only. No credit value.
Civil Engineering
CIVI 6001 Advanced Reinforced Concrete (4 credits)
Strength limits; modes of failure; flexural and inclined cracking strength; crack propagation; crack width; deformation; biaxial and multiaxial strength of concrete; ultimate strength in flexure; ultimate strength in diagonal splitting; ultimate strength of columns; current research progress and modelling for finite element analysis; new code regulations. A project is required.
CIVI 6011 Pre-cast and Pre-stressed Concrete Structures (4 credits)
Prefabrication and prestressing concepts; segmental and modular structures and connections; composite and pre-and post-tensioned structures; analysis and design of determinate and indeterminate systems; design codes. A project is required.
CIVI 6021 Durability of Concrete Materials (4 credits)
Influence of constituent materials (cements, aggregates and admixtures) on the properties of fresh and hardened concrete. Chemistry and hydration reactions of cement and alternate cementing materials. Development of pore structure and its influence on transport and deterioration mechanisms, durability testing. Concrete mixture design and optimization for high performance and other speciality concrete types. Climatic loads affecting durability and performance. Performance vs. prescriptive specifications. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken ENGR 691B (Performance and Durability of Concrete Materials) may not take this course for credit.
CIVI 6031 Seismic Assessment and Retrofit of Structures (4 credits)
Seismic rehabilitation requirements and performance objectives. Evolution of codes, standards and regulations. Selection of retrofit design methodology. General strategies to develop rehabilitation schemes: add stiffness, damping, and/or mass reduction. Seismic assessment of existing steel structures. Behaviour and design of structures equipped with energy dissipation devices. Case studies and a project are required.
Note: Students who have taken CIVI 691B (Seismic Assessment and Retrofit of Structures) may not take this course for credit.
CIVI 6051 Design of Industrial Structures (4 credits)
Problems in the design of industrial structures in steel, reinforced concrete, masonry, and timber; rejuvenation and expansion of existing plant facilities; design of bracing systems, foundations, silos and liquid storage tanks; connections, standard details and codes. A case study and project.
CIVI 6061 Structural Health Monitoring (4 Credits)
Review of the current state of infrastructure including bridges, dams, pipelines as well as buildings. Components of civil infrastructure including smart and innovative structures. Structural Health Monitoring (SHM): principles, techniques, implementation, interdisciplinary approach, advantages and challenges. SHM systems: component and system design, sensors and instrumentation, data acquisition, data management, interpretation of SHM data, assessment of structural condition, and decision making. Damage detection methods: local and global, analytical and experimental, non-destructive evaluation, vibration based damage identification. Field applications. A project is required.
CIVI 6071 Advanced Steel Structures Design (4 credits)
Topics of this course include design principles of ductile building structures; fundamentals of stability theory, frame stability; concept, methods and applications of plastic analysis; design for local and global stability of braced frames, moment-resisting frames and structures equipped with passive supplemental damping systems: hysteretic, yielding and self-centring dampers; design strategies for enhanced seismic stability; computer applications. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for CIVI 691C (Advanced Steel Structures Design) may not take this course for credit.
CIVI 6101 Planning and Design of Bridges (4 credits)
History and development of bridges; basic parameters; material, system and geometry; selection of location and optimum proportioning of different structural types; selection and design of steel and concrete highway and railway bridge structures based on requirements of economics; maintenance, aesthetics and safety; modern trends in bridge design and construction; analysis of existing bridges; numerical examples. A project is required.
CIVI 6301 Hydrology (*) (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent).
Weather elements; precipitation, stage-discharge relations; evapo-transpiration; ground water flow, method of images; streamflow hydrograph, unit hydrograph and its applications, synthetic hydrographs; laminar flow; hydrologic routing; instantaneous hydrography; hydraulic routing, method of characteristics, kinematic routing; statistical analysis, confidence intervals, stochastic generator, auto-regressive model; applications of hydrology. A case study and a project are required.
CIVI 6331 Hydraulic Engineering (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent).
Development of surface water resources; basic measurements in hydraulic engineering; storage reservoirs; practical problems; run-off characteristics of natural streams; control structures; economic analysis; energy dissipators; sediment transportation; transitions; elements of river engineering; navigation; control of floods. A case study and a project are required.
CIVI 6381 Hydraulic Structures (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent).
Design of storage dams; characteristics of spillways and other outlet works; design of control structures; principles and design of flow measuring structures; special topics. A project is required.
CIVI 6401 Transportation Systems Analysis (4 credits)
Aspects of probability and statistics as applied to transportation; network theory; system operations and safety management; applications of optimization and decision theory to selection of alternative systems and facility location; evaluation of traffic control devices; signal timing plans and management strategies. A project is required.
CIVI 6411 Urban Transportation Planning (*) (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent).
Forecasting future travel patterns; travel characteristics; systems approach to transportation planning process; land use data collection and demand analysis; trip generation; trip distribution; model and root assignment; transportation of commodities; environmental impact analysis. Computer modelling. A project is required.
CIVI 6441 Traffic Engineering (4 credits)
(Cannot be taken for credit by students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent).
Analysis of existing traffic flow conditions; study of traffic characteristics; volume and speed surveys; capacity-performance relations for urban streets and intersections; signal timing and coordination; traffic and environmental management; computer applications in incident detection and control; analysis and management of safety. A project is required.
CIVI 6451 Pavement Design (4 credits)
Components of pavement systems; materials, tests and specifications; granular and treated bases, subgrade and drainage; earthwork and soil stabilization; mechanistic-empirical theory for pavements; damage accumulation; axle loads and stresses in pavements; design methods for flexible and rigid pavements of highways and airports; design of pavement overlays; economic requirements; design projects and computer applications. A project is required.
CIVI 6461 Pavement Management Systems (4 credits)
Topics include introduction to pavement systems; strategic, tactical and operational planning for sustainable pavements; preservation, rehabilitation, upgrading and expansion; pavement damage assessment; data collection; decision making; performance modelling; pavement deterioration; coordination and scheduling of interventions. A project is required.
CIVI 6481 Sustainable Management of Industrial Waste (4 credits)
Industrial ecology and sustainable engineering concepts, characterization and sources of industrial waste, toxicological and risk aspects of waste management; environmental impact, material flow analysis, energy balance and recovery, management of water and resources use, material minimization, storage, physical, chemical and biological transformations, recycling, reuse and disposal, life cycle assessment, regulations, ISO certification. A project is required.
CIVI 6491 Engineering Aspects of Site Remediation (4 credits)
Physico-chemical characteristics of subsurface; soil biology; introduction to subsurface transport of contaminants; site assessment techniques; bioremediation principles and techniques; physico-chemical remediation; thermal removal; in-situ and ex-situ groundwater techniques; natural attenuation; case studies; lab demonstrations. A project is required.
CIVI 6501 Foundation Engineering (4 credits)
Theoretical development of bearing capacity of shallow and deep foundations, settlement analyses, design of retaining walls, sheet piles, tiebacks and caissons, dynamic analyses of pile foundations, design of machine foundations, foundations on difficult soils, construction and performance of foundations, computer applications, case histories. A project is required.
CIVI 6511 Earth Structures and Slope Stability (4 credits)
Design and construction of earth and rockfill dams. Seepage problems, flow nets, seepage control, soil compaction and stabilization. Computer analysis of slope stability, factor of safety. Measures taken to limit and accommodate settlements. Case studies.
CIVI 6521 Soil Behaviour (4 credits)
Drained and undrained shear strength of soils, stress-strain relationships, two and three dimensional stress paths. Pore water pressure coefficients in saturated and partially saturated clays. One and three dimensional consolidation theories, design of sand drains, and applications. Special geotechnical problems. A project is required.
CIVI 6531 Soil Testing and Properties (4 credits)
Measurement and evaluation of soil consolidation, strength, and pore water pressure characteristics by means of consolidation, triaxial and direct shear tests. Application of test results to design and research problems. A project is required.
CIVI 6541 Reinforced Earth (4 credits)
Design of geotechnical structures reinforced with geotextiles and geogrids to improve their strength and deformation properties. Use of geonets and geomembranes to accelerate the drainage and consolidation of soil systems. Soil nailing and inclined piling to prevent downhill creep and slope failure. Analysis and design of stone columns used to support light structures and prevent instability due to soil liquefaction. A project is required.
CIVI 6601 Modelling in Building and Environmental Engineering (4 credits)
Continuous and discrete forms of conservation laws: mass, momentum and energy, numerical methods (finite differences, implicit and explicit schemes, finite elements). Transport of contaminants and moisture in buildings and contaminants in the environment. Modelling and measuring sources and sinks of pollutants. Computer applications to building and environmental engineering. A case study and project.
CIVI 6611 Environmental Engineering (4 credits)
Introduction to waste water treatment and control; stream pollution and control; ground water pollution; air pollution; acid rain, meteorological aspects. Noise pollution; hazardous waste disposal; solid waste management. A case study and a project are required.
CIVI 6621 Engineering Aspects of Biological Treatment of Water and Air (4 credits)
Introduction to aerobic/anaerobic microbial processes, design of aerobic and anaerobic systems for biological treatment of municipal, industrial and agricultural water and air pollution, design and modelling of activated sludge reactors, trickling filters, plug flow reactors, lagoons, nutrient removal, constructed wetlands, phytoremediation, biofilters, bioscrubbers, management of biosolids, lab demonstration. A case study and project.
CIVI 6631 Hazardous Material Management and Transportation (4 credits)
Characterization and sources of hazardous materials, accidental release of hazardous material, toxicological aspects of hazardous material; risk analysis, legal issues, management of hazardous material after catastrophic events, storage, treatments, recycling, reuse and exchange of hazardous materials, life cycle analysis, attenuation of accidental release of hazardous materials, transportation and environmental systems interface, transportation network, minimum-risk route models, determination of safe truck routes and management. A project is required.
CIVI 6641 Unit Operations in Environmental Engineering (4 credits)
Physical and chemical principles underlying coagulation, flocculation, sedimentation, sorption, reverse osmosis, electrodialysis, ion exchange and sludge dewatering. Design and scale-up equations for clarifiers, absorption columns, filters, centrifuges, electrodialysis stacks, air components and demineralization units, lab demonstration. A case study and a project are required.
CIVI 6651 Water Pollution and Control (4 credits)
Physical, chemical and biological characteristics of water, water quality standards, reaction kinetics and material balances, eutrophication. Containment of reactive contaminants. Natural purification processes in water system, adsorption, absorption; diffusion and dispersion, oxidation. Large-scale transport of contaminants, single and multiple source models; modelling of transport processes, computer simulation, introduction to groundwater pollution, sea-water intrusion. A case study and a project are required.
CIVI 6661 Environmental Impact Assessment (*) (4 credits)
Engineering activities and the environment; environmental ethics. Prediction and estimation, statistical analysis of impact on air, water, soil quality and biological, socio-economic, cultural environments. Water and air pollution law, solid and hazardous waste laws. Applications of GIS, Environmental inventories, assessment preparation and review. Federal and provincial laws and regulations on environmental assessment. Strategies for environmental compliance, resolution of environmental conflicts. Case studies and project.
CIVI 6671 Fate and Transport of Contaminants in the Environment (4 credits)
Physical and chemical properties of organic and inorganic contaminants, air-soil-water-cycle and contaminant interactions, adsorption/desorption models, soil components in contaminant transport, influence of groundwater composition, advective flow, diffusion transport, diffusion and dispersion coefficients, partition coefficients, mechanisms and modelling of contaminant transport in soil and groundwater, environmental fate of contaminants Case studies concerning landfills, greenhouse effects, soil and groundwater interactions, nuclear waste disposal. A project is required.
CIVI 6681 Environmental Nanotechnology (4 credits)
Topics include basic concepts of nanoscience and nanotechnology; characterization of nanomaterials; nanoscience and public policy aspects; nanoparticle transport and fate in the environment; nanohazard assessment and nanotoxicology; environmental engineering applications of nanotechnology: pollutants sensing, monitoring, control and remediation. A project is required.
CIVI 6691 Greenhouse Gases and Control (4 credits)
Topics include physiochemical characteristics of greenhouse gas (GHG) species; GHG emissions, inventories, quantification and management; international and regional standards, protocols, regulations and schemes; GHG information management systems; GHG reuse, recycling, and sequestration; GHG emissions modelling and control planning; available and emerging technologies for reducing GHG emissions. A project is required.
CIVI 6711 Asset Management for Sustainable Civil Infrastructure (4 credits)
Topics include fundamentals of the infrastructure asset management process; strategic planning, location of underground assets, condition assessment and performance indicators, deterioration models, and development of community driven levels of service; life-cycle analysis, integrated infrastructure modelling, optimized intervention plans and budget allocation, asset management software systems. A project is required.
CIVI 691 Topics in Civil Engineering I (4 credits)
Note: Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for these courses, providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number. e.g. CIVI 691A, CIVI 691B, etc.
CIVI 7001 Earthquake Engineering (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6581.
Earthquake ground motion characteristics; behaviour of buildings, bridges, etc., methods and principles of structural dynamics; inelastic action and concept of energy absorption; evaluation of damage; soil structure interaction problems; design methods and code requirements; current research. A project is required.
CIVI 7031 Dynamics of Foundations (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6581.
Principles of soil dynamics; dynamic loads, theory of vibrations and design considerations for foundations of different types; shallow foundations, deep foundations, massive machine bases; problems of soil-structure interaction. A project is required.
CIVI 7101 Theory and Design of Orthotropic Bridges (4 credits)
Prerequisite: CIVI 6101.
Natural and technical orthotropy; orthogonally stiffened plates; methods of bridge analysis and design; materials; specifications; analysis of existing orthotropic structures; numerical examples. A project is required.
CIVI 7111 Theory and Design of Modern Bridge Systems (4 credits)
Prerequisite: CIVI 6101.
Hybrid, post-stressed and composite plate girders and trusses; delta type girders; orthotropic, shell types and tubular bridges, cable-stayed and stiffened cable bridges; optimization of bridge systems; vibrations and damping capacity; aerodynamics and seismic stability; concept of safety; fatigue and carrying capacity; use of models; application of computers. A project is required.
CIVI 7121 Cable Stayed Bridges (4 credits)
Prerequisite: CIVI 6101.
Basic bridge systems; methods of structural analysis; aerodynamic stability; structural details; typical structures. A project is required.
CIVI 7311 Advanced Analysis of Groundwater Flow and Contamination (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENCS 6021.
Groundwater storage and supply; storage in confined aquifers; water table fluctuation; aquifers; steady groundwater hydraulics; aquifer tests and pumping. Groundwater flow equations; conservative and reactive contaminant transport of groundwater systems; analytical and numerical solutions of contaminant transport equations; flow and solute transport in fractured porous media; assessment of environmental impact of waste disposal operations, model implementation strategies. A project is required.
CIVI 7401 Design of Transportation Terminals (4 credits)
Prerequisites: CIVI 6401 or 6411.
Functions of transportation terminals; airports, seaports, public transit terminals; systems approach to passenger and freight terminal design; criteria for evaluating the inter-modal transfer process and user requirements. Simulation models and analytical techniques for quality of service analysis and evaluation of terminal configurations; requirements of new systems; high capacity aircraft; V/STOL aircraft, LRT and HST systems. A project is required.
CIVI 7901 Environmental Engineering Research Project (9 Credits)
Prerequisite: Completion of at least 20 credits in the Environmental Engineering program and permission of the Departmental Graduate Program Director.
This is a research project to be completed under the supervision of a full-time faculty member from the Department. The research topic must be in the field of environmental engineering, and should be selected in consultation and with the approval of a faculty supervisor. The course is graded on the basis of the student’s performance during the work period, which includes a technical report that is assessed by two faculty members in the area.
CIVI 791 Topics in Civil Engineering II (4 credits)
Note: Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for these courses, providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number. e.g. CIVI 691A, CIVI 691B, etc.
CIVI 8011 Doctoral Seminar in Civil Engineering (***)
Grading on a pass/fail basis only. No credit value.
Chemical and Materials Engineering
CHME 6001 Project in Chemical and Materials Engineering (1 credit)
The course consists of an individual project in a chosen area of study in the area of Chemical and Materials Engineering under the supervision of a faculty member. This course may be repeated for credit.
CHME 6011 Advanced Transport Phenomena (4 credits)
Topics include equations of heat, mass, and momentum transfer; viscosity, thermal conductivity and diffusivity in laminar and turbulent conditions; velocity, temperature, and concentration distributions in selected systems; Navier-Stokes equations: direct simulation and turbulence modelling – Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS); turbulence near surfaces and interphase transport; multicomponent mass transfer; transport in porous media; effects of narrow pore size; and the dusty-gas model (DGM). A project is required.
CHME 6021 Advanced Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics (4 credits)
Topics include principles, concepts, and laws/postulates of classical and statistical thermodynamics and their link to applications that require quantitative knowledge of thermodynamic properties from a macroscopic to a molecular level; basic postulates of classical thermodynamics and their application; criteria of stability and equilibria; constitutive property models of pure materials and mixtures, including molecular-level effects using statistical mechanics; equations of state; phase and chemical equilibria of multicomponent systems; and thermodynamics of polymers. Applications are emphasized through extensive problem work relating to practical cases. A project is required.
CHME 6031 Chemical Kinetics and Reaction Engineering (4 credits)
CHME 6041 Chemical Engineering Process Dynamics and Control (4 credits)
Topics include principles of process dynamics and control; step response curves; PID control; strategies for chemical process control; process model identification; dynamic chemical process simulation; model-predictive control algorithms; and assessment of controller performance. A project is required.
CHME 6051 Chemical Process Engineering and Design (4 credits)
Topics include a review of the concepts of industrial chemical process design, engineering economics, process optimization, process simulation and plant safety; the use of fundamental knowledge in science and mathematics to design practical chemical engineering facilities. Special emphasis is placed on safety, hazards, sustainability and loss prevention issues in chemical plants. A project is required.
CHME 6061 Advanced Biochemical Engineering (4 credits)
Topics include the interaction of chemical engineering, biochemistry, and microbiology; mathematical representations of microbial systems. Kinetics of growth, death, and metabolism are also covered, as well as studies of continuous fermentation, agitation, mass transfer, and scale-up in fermentation systems, and enzyme technology. A project is required.
CHME 6071 Materials Science and Engineering (4 credits)
Topics include structure, behaviour and properties of engineering materials – metals, ceramics, polymers and composites; effects of crystalline structure and imperfections; and methods of observing, measuring and interpreting properties of materials. A project is required.
CHME 6081 Advanced Separation Processes (4 credits)
Topics include a review of basic chemical and mechanical separations; multicomponent separations; membrane separations; adsorption; chromatographic separations; and ion exchange. A project is required.
CHME 6091 Statistics for Chemical Engineering (4 credits)
Topics include a review of basic statistics; hypothesis testing; multivariate statistics; linear and nonlinear regression; chemical process model calibration; and response surface methodology. A project is required.
CHME 6101 Advanced Battery Materials and Technologies (4 credits)
Topics include a review of the principles of batteries, fuel cells, and supercapacitors; electrodes and electrolytes; thermodynamics, reaction kinetics, transport phenomena, electrostatics and phase transformations of various energy storage materials, particularly lithium-ion batteries, supercapacitors, and fuel cells; and experimental methods to study key parameters of energy storage materials, focusing on a materials science approach. A project is required.
CHME 6111 Polymer Chemistry and Engineering (4 credits)
Topics include the advanced theory and industrial practice of polymers, polymer chemistry, and polymer reactor engineering. The course covers polymer chemistry and polymerization kinetics for various types of polymerization including condensation, free radical, cationic, anionic, and coordination polymerization; polymerization processes including bulk, solution, emulsion, dispersion, gas phase, and slurry processes; polymer reactor engineering, polymer materials structure and property characterization, and recent developments in the field are included. A project is required.
CHME 6121 Nanomaterials Science and Engineering (4 credits)
Topics include chemical and engineering aspects of nanomaterials. The course covers synthesis, characterization, properties, and applications of a variety of nanomaterials, with a focus on representative inorganic nanomaterials, as well as carbon nanomaterials such as fullerenes, carbon nanotubes, and graphene. A project is required.
CHME 6131 Advanced Colloid and Interface Science and Engineering (4 credits)
Topics include properties of colloids and surfactants; physical and chemical interactions between colloidal particles: attraction and repulsion; stability of colloidal dispersions; coagulation and flocculation; surface and interface tension - wettability; characterization methods of colloidal particles; the relation between interface energy and adsorption; adsorption of surfactants on interfaces; micelles; surfactants in nanotechnology; adsorption in porous media; and surface characterization methods. A project is required.
CHME 6911 Topics in Chemical Engineering I (4 credits)
Note: Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for these courses providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the title of the topic. A project is required.
CHME 7911 Topics in Chemical Engineering II (4 credits)
Note: Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for these courses providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the title of the topic. A project is required.
Electrical and Computer Engineering
COEN 6211 Biological Computing and Synthetic Biology (*) (4 credits)
Introduction to the cell and the genome. Foundations of synthetic biology and ethics. Synthetic genomes and metabolic engineering. Model organisms, such as E. coli bacteria, and synthetic cells: self-replicating cells man-made from cloned genes, a cellular membrane and the basic elements of RNA and protein synthesis. Designing computational devices for implementation in biological cells. Introduction to modelling and computer simulation of gene regulatory networks. Methods of building and testing gene regulatory networks within and without cells. Expanding functionality via inter-cellular signaling. Basic interfacing to electronic sensors and actuators. Landmark and interesting applications of synthetic biology in computer engineering and other disciplines. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for COEN 691A or BIOL 631B (Biological Computing and Synthetic Biology) may not take this course for credit.
COEN 6311 Software Engineering (4 credits)
Software life cycle, software requirements and requirement documentation. Software design: top-down and bottom-up approaches; design validation and design reviews. Software implementation, choice of a programming language and portability. Testing, debugging and verification. Design of test cases. Software documentation and its maintenance. Documentation tools and documentation portability, user interface design. A project is required.
COEN 6312 Model-Driven Software Engineering (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COEN 6311 or COMP 6471 or equivalent.
Model-Driven Architecture (MDA), domain-based system partitioning, Platform-Independent Modelling (PIM), Platform Specific Modelling (PSM), Unified Modelling Language (UML), static and dynamic modelling with UML, UML extension mechanisms, UML profiling, Object Constraint Language (OCL), model transformation, introduction to Query/View/Transformation standard, action specification (OAL), automatic system generation. A project is required.
COEN 6313 Programming on the Cloud (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COEN 6311.
Topics include definition(s) of principles of cloud-based problem solving and programming; autonomy of cloud computing, service and business models, data centres and virtualization; CAP theorem, REST API and data models; MapReduce and programming model, distributed file systems for computer clusters, development environments and tools on clouds; cloud-based access and query; cloud application design principles; applications of cloud service concepts to the  design of a real-world Internet service. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken COEN 691 (Programming on the Cloud) may not take this course for credit.
COEN 6321 Applied Evolutionary and Learning Algorithms (*) (4 credits)
Topics include heuristic learning algorithms applied to real-world problems of design, classification, prediction and abstraction. Genetic algorithms, genetic programming, evolutionary strategies, generative and developmental systems, artificial life approaches, swarm intelligence, self-modifying programs, tabu search, simulated annealing and support vector machines; introduction to deep learning architectures. Examples of practical applications and challenges focused on biological and biomedical engineering. A project is required.
COEN 6331 Neural Networks (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6131.
Fundamentals of artificial neural networks; rigorous analysis of and introduction to various network paradigms: perceptrons, backpropagation, counter-propagation, Hopfield nets, bi-directional associative memories, adaptive resonance theory, cognitron and neocognitron; neural network topologies, memories, learning, stability and convergence; applications to adaptive knowledge, knowledge processing, classification, pattern recognition, signal processing, communications, robotics and control; and assessment of current neural network technology. A project is required.
COEN 6341 Embedded System Modelling (4 credits)
Fundamental issues and state-of-the-art methods, tools and techniques for system-level design of heterogeneous multi-core embedded systems. Modelling at different levels, from abstract specification down to implementation across hardware-software boundaries. Embedded system specification using system-level design languages, SystemC and SpecC. Application modelling and analysis. Embedded multi-core platforms. Transaction-level platform modelling. Processor and RTOS modelling. Communication architecture modelling. A project is required.
COEN 6501 Digital System Design and Synthesis (4 credits)
This course introduces students to VHDL language and modelling digital circuit with VHDL. Topics include: arithmetic and logic circuits. Storage devices. Finite State Machines. Algorithmic State Machines. Timing issues. Asynchronous Design. VHDL and modelling with VHDL. Synthesis and architectural models for synthesis. Project involving system design and modelling. A project is required.
COEN 6511 VLSI Circuit Design (4 credits)
Physical design of digital circuits using technologies of Very Large Scale Integration. CMOS and BiCMOS logic blocks. CMOS processing technology, design rules, CAD issues, and limitation of CMOS technologies. Physical layouts and parasitic elements of CMOS circuits. Characterization and performance evaluation. Electrical simulation using HSPICE. Design and implementation of CMOS logic structures, interconnects, and I/O structures, emphasis on optimizing operation speed and/or power dissipation/distribution. Project of circuit design using a specified CMOS technology. A project is required.
COEN 6521 Design for Testability (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COEN 6501 or COEN 6511.
Stuck-at faults, observability, controllability, fault coverage, test vectors, automatic test pattern generation (ATPG), statistical fault analysis, ad-hoc testing, level sensitive scan design (LSSD), serial scan, parallel scan, signature analysis and BILBO, boundary scan, built-in-self-test (BIST), IDDQ testing. A project is required.
COEN 6531 ASIC Synthesis (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COEN 6501 or COEN 6511.
Introduction to high level synthesis; synthesis models. The synthesis process; High Level Description Languages; scheduling; chaining and pipelining; clock optimization and synthesis; I/O synthesis. Behavioral synthesis; architectural trade-offs in power, area and delay. Design flow with FPGAs; design flow with full-custom and semi-custom ASIC’s. A project is required.
COEN 6541 Functional Hardware Verification (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COEN 6501 or equivalent.
Review of hardware design languages. Definition of functional verification. Design for verification. Writing testbenches, simulation engines, and coverage metrics. Introduction to verification languages. Verification plan: strategies, testcases, testbenches. Modelling verification environments. Modelling input relations, intervals, events. Introduction to formal verification tools. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for COEN 691X (Hardware Functional Verification) may not take this course for credit.
COEN 6551 Formal Hardware Verification (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COEN 6501.
Design verification technology. Introduction to mathematical logic (propositional, first-order, higher-order). Formal methods. Formal specification and validation. Combinational equivalence checking. Binary decision diagrams: BDD, automata theory, sequential equivalence checking, model theory, temporal logics, model checking, proof theory, predicate logic, theorem proving, formal verification CAD tools. Practical case studies. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for COEN 7501 (Hardware Formal Verification) may not take this course for credit.
COEN 6611 Real-time Systems (4 credits)
Taxonomy of real-time systems; Scheduling algorithms for static and dynamic tasks; Fault-tolerance and reliability; Resource and resource access control; Multiprocessor scheduling, resource access control, and synchronization; Real-time communication, Case studies in distributed real-time systems (e.g., HARTS, MARS, Spring, etc.). A project is required.
COEN 6711 Microprocessors and Their Applications (4 credits)
Introduction to microprocessors and their architectures. Examples of various microprocessors. Bus and I/O Organizations. Addressing modes. Timing. Software related issues. Memory and its hierarchy. Static and dynamic memory interfacing. Synchronous and asynchronous interfacing. Interrupts. DMA. Use of Co-processors. Single chip Micro-controllers. Examples of microprocessor applications at the system level. A project is required.
COEN 6721 Fault-Tolerant Distributed Systems (4 credits)
Fundamentals of the design and analysis of fault-tolerant systems, Models for distributed systems, Fault/error models, Techniques for providing hardware/software redundancy, Fault-detection in multi-processors, Stable storage, Recovery strategies for multi-processors (checkpointing), System diagnosis, Software design faults, Experimental validation techniques, Case studies in fault-tolerant distributed systems. A project is required.
COEN 6741 Computer Architecture and Design (4 credits)
Review of basic computer architecture designs. Fundamentals of computer design and performance. Cost issues. Instruction set design principles. Memory hierarchies: registers, caches and virtual memories. Basic processor implementation issues. High performance computing issues such as pipelining, superscalar and vector processing. Input/output subsystem designs. A project is required.
COEN 691 Topics In Computer Engineering I (4 credits)
Note: Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for these courses, providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. COEN 691A, COEN 691B, etc.
COEN 7311 Protocol Design and Validation (4 credits)
Prerequisites: COEN 6311 and ELEC 6851 or COMP 6461.
OSI model, introduction to seven layers, protocols, services. Protocol modelling techniques: FSM models, Petri net models, Hybrid models. Temporal logic. Protocol specification languages of ISO: Estelle model and language. Lotos model and language. Protocol implementation and techniques from formal specification to implementation. Protocol verification techniques: communicating FSM, reachability analysis, verification using checking, protocol design validation. Protocol performance: performance parameters, performance measurement by simulation, extensions to Estelle. Protocol testing: test architectures, test sequences, test sequence languages, test design methodology. A project is required.
COEN 7741 Advanced Computer Architecture (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COEN 6741.
Multiprocessing, Parallel processing, Vector processing, MIMD, SIMD, ILP (Instruction Level Parallelism), Superscalar, VLIW, Multithreading, Systolic processors, etc. A project is required.
COEN 791 Topics In Computer Engineering II (4 credits)
Note: Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for these courses, providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. COEN 791A, COEN 791B, etc.
ELEC 6041 Large-scale Control Systems (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6131 or equivalent.
Introduction to large-scale systems and applications. Model-order reduction and minimal realization. Centralized and decentralized fixed modes (CDMs and DEMs). Characterization and computation of DEMs and approximate DEMs. Structured and unstructured DEMs. Quotient fixed modes and stabilizability of decentralized systems by means of linear time-varying control law. Effects of sampling on decentralized control systems. Centralized and decentralized robust servomechanism problem. Decentralized controller design using pole assignment technique and optimization method. A project is required.
ELEC 6051 Introduction to Analog VLSI (4 credits)
Challenges of IC techniques and of VLSI, BJT and MOS processes. Passive components; network models and simulations. Layout design rules and CAD packages. Switch, active resistor, current mirror and voltage references; differential amplifiers, comparators, operational amplifiers, transinductance amplifiers, voltage to current transducers. Noise considerations. Offset and precision techniques. Applications: RF amplifiers, filters, oscillators, current mode IC networks. A project is required.
ELEC 6061 Real-time Computer Control Systems (4 credits)
Introduction to real-time computer control systems; a review of discrete-time signals and systems, difference equations, z-transform; sampled data systems, sample and hold, discrete models; discrete equivalents of continuous-time systems; stability analysis; design specifications; design using root locus and frequency response methods; implementation issues including bumpless transfer, integral windup, sample rate selection, pre-filtering, quantization effects and computational delay; scheduling theory and priority assignment to control processes, timing of control loops, effects of missed deadlines; principles and characteristics of sensors and devices, embedded processors, processor/device interface. A project is required.
ELEC 6071 Mixed-Signal VLSI for Communication Systems (*) (4 credits)
Topics include overview of wireline communication links, mechanisms of signal degradation, modulation formats, TX/RX synchronization options, IC technology limitations, transmitter front-end circuits, receiver front-end circuits, decision circuits, clock and data recovery systems, phase-locked loops, jitter, continuous-time and discrete-time equalizers, system metrics. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for ELEC 691N (Mixed-Signal VLSI for Communication Systems) may not take this course for credit.
ELEC 6081 Modern Analog Filter Design (4 credits)
Review of network analysis. Magnitude and frequency scaling. Magnitude and phase approximation in synthesis of filter functions. Second order active RC filters. Synthesis of all-pole LC ladder filters. Second order switched capacitor filters. Integrated circuit filters. A project is required.
ELEC 6091 Discrete Event Systems (4 credits)
Introduction to discrete-event systems (DES). Modelling (languages, automata and Petri nets). Supervisory control (controllability, modular control and control under partial observation). Architecture (decentralized and hierarchical schemes). Petri nets (modelling and analysis). Timed models. A project is required.
ELEC 6111 Detection and Estimation Theory (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENCS 6161.
Basic hypothesis testing, cost functions, Bayes and Neyman Pearson tests, the power of a test, sequential tests; estimation, Bayes estimates, maximum a posteriori estimates; the Cramer-Rao inequality, maximum likelihood estimates; composite hypothesis testing, application of estimation theory to phase locked loops, vector representation of signals in noise, application of the Kharhunen-Loeve expansion, complex analytic representation of signals; detection and estimation of signals in white and non-white noise, the matched filter, composite hypothesis testing, random amplitude and phase, multi-path channels, waveform estimation, Wiener filters, Kalman filters. A project is required.
ELEC 6131 Error Detecting and Correcting Codes (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENCS 6161 or ELEC 6831.
Introduction to abstract algebra; linear block codes: cyclic, BCH, and Reed-Solomon codes; convolutional codes; TCM codes; introduction to iterative based codes; turbo codes, LDPC codes; trade-offs between power, bandwidth, data rate and system reliability. A project is required.
ELEC 6141 Wireless Communications (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6831.
Topics include wireless radio link analysis; receiver sensitivity and receiver noise sources; path loss, shadowing, and fading models; area coverage and range calculation; introduction to cellular systems: frequency reuse, trunking and grade of service, sectoring and cell splitting, coverage and capacity. Modulation techniques for mobile communications, spread-spectrum techniques; multiplexing and multiple access techniques; wireless standards from first generation to fourth generation; OFDM: an architecture for the fourth generation. A project is required.
ELEC 6151 Information Theory and Source Coding (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENCS 6161.
Entropy of a source, rate distortion functions, source coding, analog to digital conversion, effects of sampling and quantization, vector quantization, discrete memoryless channels and their capacity, cost functions, channel coding theorem, channel capacity, fundamental concepts of information theory with applications to digital communications, theory of data compression, broadcast channels, application to encryption, DES, public key encryption, computational complexity. A project is required.
ELEC 6171 Modelling and Analysis of Telecommunications Networks (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENCS 6161.
Application of queuing theory to the analysis of the performance of telecommunication systems; Poisson arrival process and its properties; Birth-death processes applied to queuing, service distributions; performance measures of a queuing systems; examples of queuing systems in equilibrium; finite and infinite server and population models; Erlang blocking formulae; method of stages.; Networks of queues; product-form solution for open and closed queuing networks; computational algorithms for queuing networks; the imbedded Markov chain technique applied to queues with general service distribution, analysis of multiple access techniques, TDMA, FDMA, polling, CDMA, ALOHA and CSMA. A project is required.
ELEC 6181 Real-time and Multimedia Communication over Internet (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6851.
Review of Internet architecture and protocols. Network impairments: jitter and delay. RTP: transport protocols for real-time data. Packet scheduling, QoS in the Internet: differentiated services, integrated services, Resource reservation protocol (RSVP), Multi protocol label switching (MPLS). Voice/Fax/Video over IP. Internet-to-PSTN. Protocols and standards - H.323, Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) and Media Gateway Control Protocol (MGCP). Internet telephony signaling. Interoperability issues. A project is required.
ELEC 6221 Solid State Devices (*) (4 credits)
Junction theory (PN junctions, Schottky and ohmic contacts, heterojunctions). Structures and characteristics of diodes, solar cells, bipolar transistors, and fundamentals of MOSFETs. Planar silicon junctions and transistors will be designed, fabricated and evaluated in the laboratory, including resistivity measurements, semiconductor cleaning, oxidation, diffusion, photolithography, etching, metallization, and the comparison of design with experimental results. A project is required.
ELEC 6231 Design of Integrated Circuit Components (*) (4 credits)
The structure, characteristics, and design of MOS capacitors and MOSFETs, FinFETs, SOI FETs, velocity-modulation transistors, and HFETs. Role of strain in operation of modern FETs. Planar MOS devices, including capacitors and MOSFETs will be designed, fabricated and evaluated in the laboratory. A project is required.
ELEC 6241 VLSI Process Technology (*) (4 credits)
Introduction to basic VLSI technologies; crystal growth, thermal oxidation, diffusion, ion implantation, chemical vapour deposition, wet and dry etching, and lithography. Layout, yield, and VLSI process integration. The lab demonstrates a semiconductor device fabrication process. A project is required.
ELEC 6251 Microtransducer Process Technology (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6231 or ELEC 6241.
Overview of micromachining process. Bulk-micromachined structures and devices. Anisotropic etching of silicon; phenomena, processes, geometry, crystal physics. Surface-micromachined structures, devices, processes. CMOS-compatible micromachining. Case-study examples. A project is required.
ELEC 6261 Optical Devices for High-Speed Communications (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6221 or equivalent.
Overview of optical properties of semiconductors. The fundamental principles for understanding and applying optical fiber technology, fundamental behaviour of the individual optical components and their interactions with other devices. Lasers, LED’s, optical fibers, light detectors, optical switches. Concepts and components of WDM and DWDM. A comprehensive treatment of the underlying physics such as noise and distortion in optical communications, light polarization, modulation and attenuation. A project is required.
ELEC 6271 Nanoscience and Nanotechnology: Opto-Electronic Devices (4 credits)
This course covers the fundamental principles of nanoscience and nanotechnology which include principles of quantum mechanics and quantum properties of solid state materials. Properties of metal and semiconducting nanoparticles and their synthesis; Carbon nanostructures and nanotubes; bulk nanostructured materials; Solid disordered nanostructures and nanostructured crystals; quantum wells, quantum wires, and quantum dots and their physical properties; preparation of quantum nanostructures, Introduction to NanoElectroMechanical Systems (NEMS), nanomachining and fabrication of nanodevices. A project is required.
ELEC 6281 Principles of Solid State Nanodevices (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6271 or equivalent.
Theoretical basis of nanodevices. Overview of fundamental quantum phenomena in semiconductors. Electronics in low-dimensional structures (two-dimensional electron gas, quantum wire and dots, electron scattering, transport). High-speed electron devices based on quantum structures (nanoscale MOSFETs, high-electron-mobility transistors, resonant-tunneling diodes and transistors, superlattice-based transistors). Logic gates based on quantum devices. Quantum optoelectronics (optical transitions in quantum structures, quantum well, quantum dots photodetectors and lasers, quantum cascade lasers). Single electron devices. Carbon nanotube transistors, molecular electronics and spintronics. Nanodevice technology and characterization. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for ELEC 691X (Principles of Solid State Nanodevices) may not take this course for credit.
ELEC 6301 Advanced Electromagnetics (4 credits)
Maxwell's equations and boundary conditions. Theorems: uniqueness, reciprocity, surface and volume equivalence. Vector potentials and solution of the homogeneous and inhomogeneous wave equations. Waveguides and scattering formulations in rectangular and cylindrical coordinates. Dielectric waveguides. Physical optics. Selected topics in integral and differential equations, ray-optical techniques, and computational methods. Applications to antennas and microwaves. A project is required.
ELEC 6311 Radiation and Scattering of Waves (4 credits)
Construction of Green’s functions. Canonical problems – waveguide, cylinder, wedge, dielectric slab. Sommerfeld integrals. Impedance boundary conditions. Surface and leaky waves. Asymptotics, method of steepest descent, method of stationary phase. High-frequency uniform asymptotic methods. Geometrical theory of diffraction. Edge diffraction, creeping waves. Applications to problems in antennas, computational electromagnetics, electromagnetic compatibility, propagation, and scattering. A project is required.
ELEC 6341 Antennas (*) (4 credits)
Antenna fundamentals and definitions. Radiation integrals. Dipoles and loops. Arrays. Antenna self and mutual inductance. Matching techniques. Travelling wave antennas. Broadband antennas. Equivalence principle. Aperture antennas. Numerical techniques. Antenna measurement techniques. A project is required.
ELEC 6351 Modern Antenna Theory (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6341.
Helmholtz equation, Green’s function, current element, the ideal dipole, radiation impedance, gain directivity, reciprocity, polarization. Half-wave dipole, antennas above ground, small loop antenna, arrays of antenna, array factor, pattern multiplication array synthesis, mutual impedance, aperture antenna. Hallens integral equation, Pocklingons equation, numerical solution by the method of weighted residuals, and by the moment method, wire grids. Magnetic field integral equation and solid surfaces. Aperture antennas, aperture integration, geometrical optics, physical optics. Geometrical theory of diffraction, wedge diffraction coefficients, applications, multiple diffraction and diffraction by curved surfaces. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for ELEC 7341 may not take this course for credit.
ELEC 6361 Acoustics (*) (4 credits)
Sound generation and propagation in elastic media; conversion between acoustical, electric and mechanical energy. Lumped-parameter approximations, sound in rooms, underwater acoustics, microphones; loudspeakers and audio communications problems; noise and vibration control problems. A project is required.
ELEC 6371 Design of Wireless RF Systems (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6391.
Introduction to wireless systems. Noise and distortion in microwave systems. Antennas and propagation. Amplifiers. Mixers. Transistor oscillators and frequency synthesizers. Modulation techniques. Receiver design. Use of RF CAD tools. A project is required.
ELEC 6381 Techniques in Electromagnetic Compatibility (4 credits)
Introduction to EMC procedures, control plans and specifications. Radiated and conducted susceptibility and emission testing. Introduction EMC antennas, antenna concepts, electric and magnetic dipoles, biconical dipoles, conical log spiral antennas, setting up fields for susceptibility testing, measuring radiation from equipment. Coupled transmission lines, pulse propagation, closely spaced parallel transmission lines, capacitive coupling, inductive coupling, shielding against magnetic fields. Shielding and enclosures, electric and magnetic field screening mechanisms, shielding effectiveness, grounding considerations. EMC test facilities, screened rooms, TEM cells. Signals and spectra, intermodulation, cross-modulation, the spectrum analyzer. Noise and pseudo-random noise, noise performance of measurement/receiving systems, noise equivalent bandwidth, noise figure, antenna noise temperature and S/N ratio. A project is required.
ELEC 6391 Microwave Engineering (*) (4 credits)
Properties of waveguides, striplines and microstrips. Scattering parameters. Butterworth and Chebyshev impedance transformers. Microwave couplers, cavities, and Fabry-Perot resonators. Periodic structures. Microwave filter design. Faraday rotation and non-reciprocal devices. A project is required.
ELEC 6411 Power Electronics I (*) (4 credits)
Introduction to power electronic systems. Semiconductor switches. Basic power converter configurations. Line commutated controlled and uncontrolled ac-dc rectifiers. Basic dc-dc converters. Pulse width modulation techniques. Basic dc-ac converters. Switching power supplies. Applications to industrial power supplies and motor drives. A project is required.
ELEC 6421 Renewable Energy Systems (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6411.
This course covers electrical basics and models of solar energy (photo-voltaics); electrical power from wind energy (including turbine operation); electrical power from wave and tidal energy; electrical power from micro-hydro and biomass waste to energy. Fundamental energy equations will be derived from physics and the electrical power equations developed. Engineering design implications will be discussed. Design assignments are given to reinforce the engineering design based on fundamental physics. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for ELEC 691Z (Renewable Energy Systems) may not take this course for credit.
ELEC 6431 Advanced Electrical Machines and Drives (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6471 or ELEC 6491.
Transient modelling of electrical machines. ABC, Park’s transform and d,q, two axis modelling of synchronous and induction machines. Application of the advanced models to machine transients, for example, direct on line starting or reclosing operation. Vector control of AC machines including permanent magnet machines. Differences between permanent magnet AC and brushless DC machines. Switched reluctance motor modelling and operation. Modelling of losses in machines. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for ELEC 691K may not take this course for credit.
ELEC 6461 Power Electronics II (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6411.
Circuits and operating principles of self commutated dc-dc and dc-ac converters. One and four quadrant dc-dc converters. Single-phase and three-phase voltage source and current source inverters. Pulse width modulation strategies. Resonant converters. Soft switching techniques. Isolated dc-dc converters. Application to switch-mode power supplies, uninterruptible power supplies and ac motor drives. A project is required.
ELEC 6471 Hybrid Electric Vehicle Power System Design and Control (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6411.
Introduction to Electric Vehicles (EV), Hybrid Electric Vehicles (HEV). Vehicle design fundamentals. Traction motors for EV/HEV propulsion. On-board energy sources and storage devices: high-voltage traction batteries, fuel cells, ultra-capacitors, flywheels. Power electronic converters and control. Various EV/HEV/Fuel Cell Vehicle topologies and modelling. Energy management strategies. Practical design considerations. Engineering impact of electric, hybrid electric, and fuel cell vehicles. A project is required.
ELEC 6481 Computer-Aided Analysis and Design of Electric Machines (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6411.
This course uses machine design software to aid in the analysis and design of electrical machines, which is offered in a computer-aided design (CAD) environment. The emphasis is on the design of electrical machines for renewable energy and electric vehicle applications. Emphasis is placed on permanent-magnet and switched reluctance machines, although machines of importance, like the induction machine, are also discussed. Magnetic equivalent circuits for a magnet and a typical machine radial field geometry are developed which lead naturally to sizing equations. Other geometries and Eddy current and hysteresis core loss models are presented. The torque angle curves of the switched reluctance machine are developed, which lead to design concepts. The synchronous reluctance machine is introduced. A project is required.
ELEC 6491 Controlled Electric Drives (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6411.
Elements of a drive system; characteristics of common mechanical systems; drive characteristics; operation in one, two or four quadrants. Fully controlled rectifier drives; braking of DC motors; control of DC motors using DC/DC converters. Control of polyphase induction motors; voltage-source and current source inverter drives; frequency-controlled induction motor drives; introduction to vector control of induction motor drives; field oriented control (FOC); sensor-less operation. Control of synchronous motors; permanent magnet motors. Switched reluctance motor (SRM) drives; stepper motors. Brush-less DC (BLDC) motor drives; low-power electronic motor drives. A project is required.
ELEC 6601 Digital Signal Processing (4 credits)
Discrete-time signals and systems, difference equation; the discrete Fourier series and transform; the Z-transform and LTI systems; sampling of continuous-time signals. Reconstruction of signals using interpolation, sampling of discrete-time signals, discrete-time decimation and interpolation, changing the sampling rate by integer and non-integer factor; multirate signal processing, polyphase decomposition, multirate filter banks; digital processing of analog signals, A/D and D/A converters; linear phase and non-linear phase systems, all-pass and minimum phase systems; recursive and non-recursive digital filters, common digital filter structures, common design approaches for digital filters; random signals; linear adaptive filters, Weiner and Least-Mean-Square filters. A project is required.
ELEC 6611 Digital Filters (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6601.
Approximation and design of recursive and non-recursive digital filters. Transformations. Stability. Digital filter structures including wave and lattice structures. Effect of quantization, noise and limit cycles. Hardware implementation. Digital filter applications. A project is required.
ELEC 6621 Digital Waveform Compression (4 credits)
Prerequisites: ELEC 6601; ENCS 6161.
Numerical representation of waveform information; common waveform communication systems; statistical models used for waveforms; visual psychophysics. Differential PCM, motion estimation/compensation for video compressions. Transform coding: run length coding, Huffman and arithmetic coding, control of Q factor and Q table, segmentation/contour/edge based coding; pre-processing and post-processing strategies. Vector quantization. Sub-band coding and Wavelet Transform. Zero trees. Channel concerns: robustness, error recovery, masking video/image bit rate source models. Coding of two-level graphics. Review of standards: JPEG, MPEG, H.261. A project is required.
ELEC 6631 Video Processing and Compression (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6601.
Topics include frequency analysis video signals, colour video models; TV and video capture and display, spatial-temporal basic operations, elementary visual features; vector matrix video notation; frequency response of human vision; theory of video sampling, video quality assessment; motion modelling and estimation; temporal frame prediction, video filtering, high-dynamic-range video; fundamentals of video compression, transform coding, predictive coding, recent video compression standards, digital TV, advanced topics. A project is required.
ELEC 6641 Two-dimensional Signal and Image Processing (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6601.
Two-dimensional signals and systems: linear system fundamentals, Fourier analysis of two-dimensional signals, discrete Fourier transform, two-dimensional FIR and IIR filter design and implementations. Image enhancement and restoration: smoothing and sharpening, noise reduction, order statistics filtering, inverse filtering, Wiener filtering, constrained least-square filtering. Wavelets and filter banks: multiresolution concept, perfect reconstruction, one- and two-dimensional wavelet transforms. Introduction to image compression: lossy and lossless compression, image compression standards. Introduction to image segmentation and edge detection. Color image processing: color image representation, color space conversion, pseudo and full color image processing. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken ELEC 7631 may not take this course for credit.
ELEC 6651 Adaptive Signal Processing (4 credits)
Prerequisites: ELEC 6601; ENCS 6161.
Optimal filtering; adaptive filter structures; linear prediction; lattice structures; Levinson recursion. The LMS-based algorithms; basic LMS and properties; mean-square error surface; stability and convergence behavior; normalized LMS; affine projection. Recursive least-square methods; method of least-squares; block least-squares methods. Frequency-domain and sub-band adaptive filters. Kalman filtering. Applications of adaptive filters. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken ELEC 7601 may not take this course for credit.
ELEC 6661 Medical Image Processing (*) (4 credits)
Topics include principles and techniques used in the processing and analysis of medical images; image quality metrics, denoising medical images, quantification, rigid and deformable registration; similarity metrics such as mutual information (MI); images from the most common medical imaging modalities (X-ray, CT, MRI and ultrasound) will be used. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken ELEC 691 (Medical Image Processing) may not take this course for credit.
ELEC 6671 Biological Signal Processing (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6601.
This course covers signal processing through discussion of current bioengineering activities which rely on signal processing and include assessment of neural function with simultaneous collection of electroencephalogram (EEG) and functional MRI data; the noninvasive assessment of cardiac autonomic regulation using electrocardiography; assessment of neural function using near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS); assessment of muscle activity using electromyography (EMG). Topics include modern spectral analysis, time-frequency analysis (short-time Fourier transforms and wavelets); signal modelling; multivariate analyses and adaptive filtering. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for ELEC 691 (Biological Signal Processing) may not take this course for credit.
ELEC 6831 Digital Communications (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6601.
Topics include random processes and linear systems; baseband modulation/demodulation, optimal receivers in AWGN, correlation and matched-filter receivers, pulse shaping for band-limited channels; bandpass modulation techniques such as PAM, PSK, DPSK, FSK, QAM; synchronization, timing and carrier recovery, maximum-likelihood carrier phase and symbol timing estimation; error control coding, linear block codes, syndrome-based decoding, system bit error rate and coding gain. A project is required.
ELEC 6841 Advanced Digital Communications (4 credits)
Prerequisites: ELEC 6831; ENCS 6161.
Digital signaling over band-limited channels: signal design for band-limited channels, maximum likelihood sequence detection, equalization techniques, e.g., zero-forcing, minimum mean squared error, adaptive equalization. Advanced coding and modulation: concatenated coding with iterative decoding, coded modulation techniques. Diversity techniques for fading channels. Synchronization techniques: carrier and timing recovery, frequency estimation techniques, frame and network synchronization, maximum-likelihood estimation and Cramer-Rao bounds. A project is required.
ELEC 6851 Telecommunications Networks (4 credits)
Communication Networks and Services; Introduction to Layered Network Architectures; Transmission systems and the Telephone Network: multiplexing circuit switching, routing and signaling; Peer-to-Peer Protocols: ARQ protocols, data link controls, packet multiplexing, Multiple Access Communications: Aloha, CSMA, reservation schemes, polling, token-passing ring, LAN standards, LAN Bridges; Packet-switching Networks: Datagrams and virtual circuits; TCP/IP Architecture: Internet protocol, transmission control protocol. A project is required.
ELEC 6861 Higher Layer Telecommunications Protocols (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6851.
Broadband communications: concept, issues, signaling techniques, examples. Multimedia communications: traffic characteristics, classes, issues (e.g. QOS) and architectures. Internetworking: issues, architectures (e.g. router, bridge, gateway), protocols and standards: ISO, IP and IPv6. Network Management: issues, architecture, management information base (MIBs), SNMP, TMN and CMIP. Advanced topics, such as policy approach for network management. A project is required.
ELEC 6871 Fiber-Optic Communication Systems and Networks (4 credits)
Overview of the basics of optical transmitters, optical receivers, optical fibers, optical amplifiers, and SDH/SONET. Design of optical fiber amplifiers: fiber Raman amplifiers and Erbium-doped fiber amplifiers (EDFA), theories, configurations, simulation, designs, applications, requirements for optical networks. Optical transmitters: characteristics and requirements for optical networks. Optical receivers: characteristics, requirements, noise analysis. Optical systems and performance: system architectures, design guidelines, long-haul systems, dispersion management. Coherent optical systems: ASK, FSK, DPSK, system performance. DWDM systems and networks: WAN and MAN system performance, TDM, subcarrier multiplexing, CDMA, WDM network design, network survivability. Optical solition systems: fiber solitions, loss-managed solitions, dispersion-managed solitions, impact of amplifier noise, high-speed solition system. Photonic packet switching: OTDM synchronization, header processing, burst switching. Access optical networks: architectures, PON. A project is required.
ELEC 6881 Fundamentals and Applications of MIMO Communications (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6141 or ELEC 6841.
Multiple Input Multiple Output (MIMO) communication systems and wireless channel models; Diversity techniques and array processing; MIMO channel capacity; Space-time black and trellis codes; Spatial multiplexing and layered space-time architectures, diversity-versus-multiplexing tradeoff; Differential and unitary space-time coding; MIMO OFDM and space-frequency coding; Concatenated coding and iterative decoding for MIMO systems; Applications of MIMO in wireless systems. A project is required.
ELEC 6891 Broadcast Signal Transmission (*) (4 credits)
This course covers signal definition, human eye limitations, pixel representation schemes, serial digital interface (SDI); image formats (1080i, 720i, 4k, 8k); compression schemes: H.264/265; modulation and coding techniques used in broadcasting. Terrestrial transmission standards such as DVB-T2, ATSC-3; satellite broadcasting standards such as DVB/S2; MPEG transport stream (MPEG-TS), program specific information (PSI), program ID (PID), program association tables (PAT), program map table (PMT), conditional access, program, program clock reference (PCR); multiplexing and IP encapsulation, single program transport stream (SPTS) and multiple program transport stream (MPTS); video storage and retrieval. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for ELEC 691DD (Transmission in Broadcast Signal) may not take this course for credit.
ELEC 691 Topics in Electrical Engineering I (4 credits)
See Note in Topic Area E02
ELEC 6961 Graduate Seminar in Electrical and Computer Engineering (1 credit)
Students must attend a set of seminars identified by the Department and submit a comprehensive report on topics presented in one of these seminars. The report, including an abstract, must be suitably documented and illustrated, should be at least 1000 words in length, must be typewritten on one side of 21.5 cm by 28 cm white paper of quality, and must be enclosed in binding. Students are referred to Form and Style: Thesis, Reports, Term Papers, fourth edition by Campbell and Ballou, published by Houghton Mifflin. Seminar: two hours per week.
ELEC 7151 Broadband Communications Networks (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6171.
Characterization of traffic sources, data, voice and video; ATM protocol architecture, ATM switching architectures, performance evaluation of the ATM multiplexer; Call admission control in ATM networks; Traffic management in ATM, TCP/IP over ATM and wireless ATM Fluid flow approximation, z-transform techniques, and blocking for multiclass flows. A project is required.
ELEC 7441 Design of Power Electronic Circuits (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6461.
Design driving factors. Characteristics of basic converter topologies, including resonant and soft switching circuits. Characteristics and limitations of power semiconductors as switching devices. Design considerations for gate drives, snubbers, power filters and protection circuits. Printed circuit board and thermal design. Application to the practical design of typical power converter systems. A project is required.
ELEC 7451 Power System Compensation (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6411.
Steady state and dynamic characteristics of transmission systems. Theory of line compensation and reactive power control; series and shunt passive compensation. Principles of operation of static compensators and basic configurations; series, shunt and shunt-series. Flexible ac transmission systems (FACTS). Line and self commutated controllers; configurations and control aspects. Applications to distribution systems. Performance evaluation and practical applications of static compensators. A project is required.
ELEC 791 Topics in Electrical Engineering II (4 credits)
See Note in Topic Area E02
ELEC 8011 Doctoral Seminar in Electrical Engineering (***)
Grading on a Pass/Fail basis only. No credit value.
Engineering and Computer Science
ENCS 5721 Composition and Argumentation for Engineers (3 credits)
Fundamentals of English composition and argumentation: grammar, reasoning and persuasion; persuasive proofs; argumentation; structuring and outlining: the problem statement; the body; and the conclusions. Language and persuasion for effective communication in professional engineering. Cultivation of a writing style firmly based on clear and critical thinking skills. Lectures: three hours per week.
Note: This course cannot be taken within the credit requirements of the program. Students who have taken ENCS 591A (Composition and Argumentation for Engineers) may not take this course for credit.
ENCS 6001 Elements of Engineering Mathematics (3 credits)
Functions of one variable, Taylor’s series expansion, review of differentiation, integration and solution of ordinary differential equations. Functions of several variables, partial derivatives, multiple integrals, introduction to partial differential equations, wave equation and diffusion equation. Matrix and vector analysis, characteristic value problems, orthogonal functions; introduction to statistics and numerical methods. Lectures: three hours per week.
ENCS 6021 Engineering Analysis (4 credits)
Sturm-Liouville problem; orthogonal functions; ordinary differential equations with variable coefficients and power series solutions; integral transforms; partial differential equations; boundary value problems; applications to engineering problems. A project is required.
ENCS 6031 Cultures of Engineering Practice (4 credits)
Topics include historical emergence of engineering throughout the world; cross-cultural dimensions of contemporary engineering practice; qualitative research methods for cultural analysis; technical communication across cultures. Case studies and a project are required.
ENCS 6041 Creativity, Innovation, and Critical Thinking (4 credits)
Explanations of innovative and creativity thinking; approaches to problem solving, psychology of invention; diffusion of innovation; leadership through critical thinking; design creativity; modern and historical examples of innovation; and cognitive approaches to scientific and technological thinking. A project is required.
ENCS 6042 Communication Techniques for the Innovation Process (4 credits)
This course introduces theories of client-centred design. Topics and skills covered include qualitative data collection, customer development communication, and user interview techniques. Students will have hands-on experience in customer validation, audience appropriate message creation, and advanced presentation techniques for the innovation process. A project is required.
ENCS 6043 Seminar in Innovation Process (1 credit)
Prerequisites or co-requisites: ENCS 6041 and ENCS 6042.
Registration is restricted to students enrolled in the Graduate Certificate in Innovation, Technology and Society.
The seminar integrates theoretical concepts in innovation and communication processes in preparation for projects in the certificate practicum.
ENCS 6044 Practicum in Innovation Process (6 credtis)
Prerequisites: ENCS 6041, 6042 and 6043.
Registration is restricted to students enrolled in the Graduate Certificate in Innovation, Technology and Society.
The practicum takes place in the Concordia District 3 Centre for Innovation and Entrepreneurship. Students develop innovation projects under the supervision of academic advisors and District 3 instructional personnel. This course is graded on a pass/fail basis.
ENCS 6111 Numerical Methods (4 credits)
Numerical solution of partial differential equations; weighted residuals techniques with emphasis on finite differences and finite elements; convergence, stability and consistency analysis; solution of integral equations; boundary value problems; discrete Fourier series and fast Fourier transform. A project is required.
ENCS 6141 Probabilistic Methods in Design (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENCS 6011 or equivalent.
Elements of probability theory, decision models, expected costs and benefits, models from random occurrences, extreme value statistics, Monte Carlo simulation, reliability analysis, general applications to engineering design problems. A project is required.
ENCS 6161 Probability and Stochastic Processes (4 credits)
Axioms and rules of probabilities, Bayes’ Theorem, binary communication systems, Bernoulli trials and Poisson Theorem, random variables, distributions and density functions, moments, correlation, Chebyshev and Markov’s inequalities, characteristic functions, Chernoff inequality, transformation of random variable, random processes, stationarity, Bernoulli, Random Walk, Poisson, shot noise, random telegraph, and Wiener processes, stopping time; Wald’s equation, elements of Renewal Theory, Mean-Ergodic Theorem, auto and cross-correlation functions, correlation time, auto-correlation receiver, Wiener-Khinchin Theorem, power spectral density, linear system with stochastic inputs, matched filtering. Project: two hours per week.
Note: Students who have received credit for ELEC 6161 may not take this course for credit.
ENCS 6181 Optimization Techniques I (*) (4 credits)
The optimization problem; classical optimization; one dimensional search techniques; unconstrained gradient techniques; quadratically convergent minimization algorithms; constrained optimization; constrained gradient techniques; penalty-function methods; applications. Project: two hours per week.
ENCS 6191 Fuzzy Sets and Fuzzy Logic (4 credits)
Fuzzy sets, operations on fuzzy sets, fuzzy relations; fuzzy logic: connectives, implication functions, representation of fuzzy rules and fuzzy logic based reasoning; fuzzy logic in planning and control: Zadeh’s Generalized Modus Ponens type reasoning, Mamdani type reasoning, fuzzy clustering based system identification and Sugeno type reasoning; case studies. Projects on selected applications.
ENCS 6721 Technical Writing and Research Methods for Scientists and Engineers (3 credits)
This course provides graduate students with the research writing and presentation skills that are essential in academic and professional contexts. Students develop expertise and confidence in research methods, critical reading, crafting thesis statements, leading and participating in discussions, revision/editing and peer review, maintaining research dossiers and report writing.
Note: This course cannot be taken within the credit requirements of any graduate Engineering and Computer Science program, with the exception of the Diploma in Computer Science, the Master of Engineering and the Master of Applied Computer Science. Students who have taken ENCS 591B (Technical Writing and Research Methods) may not take this course for credit.
ENCS 6811 Optical Networking: Architectures and Protocols (4 credits)
This course introduces advanced concepts and protocols of modern telecommunication networks based on Photonic technology. The basics of optical communications networks will be introduced, including the enabling technology, and the main emphasis will be on network architectures and associated protocols. This includes: orientation of transport networks and their evolution (Ring and Mesh topologies); Wavelength Division Multiplexing (WDM); wavelength-routed networks; wavelength conversion; lightpath routing protocols (static, dynamic, adaptive routing and traffic grooming) and optimization problems; control and management protocols and distributed provisioning; survivable network design (proactive and reactive); fault-management and various network restoration protocols; convergence of optical networks and the Internet (IP/WDM) and Generalized Multi Protocol Label Switching (G-MPLS). There will be various assignments in which students will be involved in research projects. Knowledge of telecommunication systems and a background in network simulation is needed. Project.
ENCS 6821 Development and Global Engineering (4 credits)
This is an introductory course in international development and global engineering for graduate students. Topics may include evolution of development, globalization, development projects, planning and analysis, and participatory data gathering. A project is required.
ENCS 691 Topics in Engineering and Computer Science (4 credits)
Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the topic title following the course number on the student record, e.g. ENCS 691 Course Topic: Environment and Social Sustainability.
ENCS 6931 Industrial Stage and Training (9 credits)
Prerequisite: Completion of at least twenty credits in the program and permission of the Departmental Co-op Program Director.
This is an integral component of the Industrial Experience option that is to be completed under the supervision of an experienced engineer/computer scientist in the facilities of a participating company (a Canadian work permit is required).
Each student receives an assessment from the Departmental Co-op Program Director in consultation with the industry supervisor and the faculty advisor. Grading is on a pass/fail basis based on a proposal, monthly progress reports, a final report and a presentation.
ENCS 8011 PhD Seminar (****) (2 credits)
Prerequisite: ENCS 8511 Doctoral Research Proposal.
The PhD Seminar is designed to train students to communicate the results of their research projects to the community and participate in research discussions. This is done when the students have sufficiently progressed into their research, normally after 6 (12 for part-time students) months of being admitted to candidacy, which is normally after 24 (48 for part-time students) months of residency, and must be completed before the submission of the thesis. The student’s evaluation, reflected by either a pass or fail grade, is based upon attendance in all seminars, a report on the student’s thesis research under the direction of the thesis supervisor(s), and a presentation.
Note: Students who have completed ENCS 8011 prior to September 2005 may not take this Seminar for credit.
ENCS 8501 Comprehensive Examination (No credit value)
See Requirements for the Degree in Engineering Programs section.
ENCS 8511 Doctoral Research Proposal (6 credits)
The goal of the doctoral research proposal is to focus the student’s PhD research. The proposal must include an extensive critical review of previous work on the subject of the thesis, and a detailed research plan of action and expected milestones. Students are required to defend their doctoral research proposal before a committee that will normally be comprised of the same members as the comprehensive examination committee.
Note: Students admitted prior to September 1997 are not allowed to substitute ENCS 8511 for an equivalent course work.
ENGR 6071 Switched and Hybrid Control Systems (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6131 or equivalent.
Review of linear control design techniques for nonlinear systems and their limitations; introduction to Lyapunov stability, Lyapunov functions and LaSalle’s invariance principle; introduction to switched and hybrid systems using piecewise-affine systems as a motivating example; modelling and simulation of switched and hybrid systems; switching policies, hybrid automata and executions; Lyapunov stability analysis of switched and hybrid systems; stability as a convex optimization problem; Lyapunov-based control of switched and hybrid systems; controller design as a non-convex problem; stability analyses and the controller design problems; dynamic programming and optimal control techniques; extensive examples from simplified models of industrial problems in the aeronautical, automotive and process industries. The course includes a computer aided controller design project.
ENGR 6131 Linear Systems (*) (4 credits)
State-space representation of dynamic systems, canonical realizations, solutions, modal decomposition, stability. Controllability and observability, minimal realizations, state feedback, pole placement, observers, observer-based controllers. Introduction to optimal control, linear quadratic regulator, the Kalman filter. Limitation on performance of control systems, introduction to robustness. A project is required.
ENGR 6141 Nonlinear Systems (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6131.
Dynamic systems: definitions and notations; nonlinear differential equations; Lipschitz continuity; linearization; describing functions; phase plane analysis; Lyapunov stability; Popov and circle criteria; limit cycles. A project is required.
ENGR 6161 Sensors and Actuators (4 credits)
Elements of smart sensors and systems and their structures; properties of various smart materials including piezoelectric, pyroelectric, shape memory alloys, Rheological fluids, piezoresistive and magnetostrictive; physical and mathematical basis of smart materials; characterization of smart multi-functional materials; sensors and actuators in mechatronics; design and fabrication of sensors and actuators by micromachining; survey of classical system theory; design of sensors and actuators for applications in industrial and medical robotics, haptics, and other systems such as aerospace and smart structures. The students are required to undertake a project work involving design of smart sensors/actuators for specific applications.
ENGR 6191 Introduction to Biomedical Engineering (4 credits)
The origin and characteristics of biological potentials: nerve, muscle, heart, brain; the measurement of biological events; instrumentation systems: electrical safety, biomechanics, biomaterials, orthopaedic engineering; biomedical engineering applications/implications in industry. Project on a current topic.
ENGR 6201 Fluid Mechanics (4 credits)
Fundamental concepts of fluid mechanics; transport phenomena; stress-strain relation; equations of motion; exact solutions; dynamic similarity; specialized equations; laminar boundary layers; flow over immersed bodies; introduction to turbulent flow. Projects on selected topics.
ENGR 6221 Microfluidic Systems (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6201 or equivalent.
Introduction to microfluidics: continuum fluid mechanics, non-continuum regimes, molecular approach. Review of classical fluid mechanics: gas flows, liquid flows, two-phase flows. Microfluidic effects: low Reynolds number flows and chaotic mixing, electrokinetics, surface tension effects and electrowetting. Electrostatic/electromagnetic/piezoelectric actuation of microfluidic systems. Methods in microfluidics: computation, experimentation. Microfluidic components: microchannels, micromixers, micropumps, microvalves, microsesors. Overview of microfluidic applications: lab-on-chip devices, microstructured fuel cells. A project is required.
ENGR 6231 Microfluidic Devices for Synthetic Biology (*) (4 credits)
Topics include introduction to microfluidic components (pumps, valves, automation), programming microfluidics, fabrication techniques, microfluidic paradigms, and applications for chemical and biological analysis; introduction to synthetic biology, biological parts and their properties, network structure and pathway engineering, synthetic networks, manipulating DNA and measuring responses, basic behaviour of genetic circuits, building complex genetic networks; integration of mircofluidics and synthetic biology; economic implications. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken ENGR 691 (Microfluidic Devices for Synthetic Biology) may not take this course for credit.
ENGR 6241 Hydrodynamics (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6201.
Fundamental concepts of ideal flow; irrotational flow patterns; kinematics of flow; potential theory; standard flow patterns; conformal transformation; Cauchy-Riemann condition; complex operator; simple engineering applications. A project is required.
ENGR 6251 The Finite Difference Method in Computational Fluid Dynamics (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6201.
Classification of second order partial differential equations, boundary conditions. Finite difference discretization of equations, truncation error, explicit and implicit formulations. Numerical stability, consistency and convergence. Time dependent (parabolic) equations, explicit and implicit discretization, stability, convergence. Steady state (elliptic) equations, explicit and implicit discretization, iterative and direct solution methods. Hyperbolic equations. Formulation of flow problems and applications to incompressible, compressible and transonic inviscid and viscous flows are interspersed throughout the course. Project on specific topic or applications.
ENGR 6261 The Finite Element Method in Computational Fluid Dynamics (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6201.
Classification of second order partial differential equations, boundary conditions. The finite element method, simple examples, assembly rules, solution of linear systems of equations. Forming the modules of a general FEM computer code. The variational approach, variational principles and stationary functions. Elements and interpolation functions. The weighted residual approach Rayleigh-Ritz, least squares, subdomain and collocation, weak Galerkin formulation. Formulation of flow problems and applications to incompressible, compressible and transonic inviscid and viscous flows are interspersed throughout the course. Project on specific topic or applications.
ENGR 6281 Modelling Turbulent Flows (4 credits)
Computational methods in fluid mechanics, the Reynolds-averaged equations, scales of turbulence, two-point correlation tensors, algebraic models, one equation and two equation models, Boussinesq approximation, nonlinear constitutive relations, types of turbulent flows, multiple time scales and stiff differential equations, solution convergence and grid sensitivity, brief introduction to advanced models. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for ENGR 691C (Modelling Turbulent Flows) may not take this course for credit.
ENGR 6291 Rheology (4 credits)
Viscoelasticity, standard flows and material functions, relationships between material functions, generalized Newtonian fluid, the Maxwell model, finite linear viscoelasticity, continuum constitutive equations, effects of material, temperature and pressure on viscoelasticity behaviour, rheometry issues in viscoelastic flow simulations, industrial applications of rheology. A project is required.
Note: Basic understanding of fluid mechanics is required.
ENGR 6301 Advanced Dynamics (4 credits)
Dynamics of rigid bodies; generalized coordinates; D’Alembert’s principle; Lagrange’s equations; energy methods, Hamilton’s theory; Euler-Lagrange equations; variational principle of mechanics. Phase space canonical transformation. Language multipliers methods. Hamilton-Jacobe equation. Project on specific topic or applications.
ENGR 6311 Vibrations in Machines and Structures (*) (4 credits)
Vibrations of discrete systems: Single-Degree of Freedom (SDOF) and Multi-Degree of Freedom (MDOF) systems; continuous systems: bars, beams, membranes and plates with various boundary conditions; mode superposition; energy methods; Rayleigh-Ritz Method; condensation techniques; applications to machine components, rotor bearing systems, vehicle and aerospace structures. Project on selected topics is an integral part of the course.
ENGR 6371 Micromechatronic Systems and Applications (*) (4 credits)
Introduction to microsystems and devices; mechanical properties of materials used in microsystems; microfabrication and post-processing techniques; sacrificial and structural layers; lithography, deposition and etching; introduction and design of different types of sensors and actuators; micromotors and other microdevices; mechanical design, finite element modelling; design and fabrication of free-standing structures; microbearings; special techniques: double sided lithography, electrochemical milling, laser machining, LIGA, influence of IC fabrication methods on mechanical properties; application examples in biomedical, industrial and space technology areas; integration, bonding and packaging of MEMS devices. This course includes a project.
ENGR 6411 Robotic Manipulators I: Mechanics (*) (4 credits)
Types of industrial robots and their applications. Mathematical analysis for robot manipulation: homogeneous transformations; definition and solution of kinematic equations governing the position and orientation of the hand. Force analysis and static accuracy; forces and moments of inertia, dynamic equation of equilibrium, differential equations of motion of robotic arms. Robotic actuators. Project on specific topic or applications.
ENGR 6412 Autonomy for Mobile Robots (*) (4 credits)
Topics include application of autonomous wheeled robots: autonomous cars, indoor robots, (off-road) unmanned ground vehicles; robot motion models, robot odometry; robot sensor models: beam models of range finders, feature-based measurement models; occupancy grid mapping; the Bayes Filter; the Kalman filter; the particle filter; robot localization: particle filter localization, Kalman filter localization; introduction to simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM). A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for ELEC 691 MM (Autonomy for Mobile Robots) may not take this course for credit.
ENGR 6421 Standards, Regulations and Certification (4 credits)
Overview of DoT and other international (FAA, etc.) aviation standards, regulations and certification procedures; regulatory areas, namely, pilot training/testing, air traffic procedures, aircraft systems design and airworthiness; development process for new regulations and criteria for certification. Projects on selected topics.
ENGR 6441 Materials Engineering for Aerospace (4 credits)
Fundamentals of materials engineering and processing with special emphasis on aerospace engineering materials and protection against failure; microstructures, phase equilibria for aerospace materials, dislocations, deformation, strain hardening and annealing, recovery, recrystallization; hot and cold metal forming (aircraft fabrication), solidification, castings (process and defects); welding and non-destructive testing, solid solution and dispersion strengthening; ferrous alloys and super alloys, light alloys (AL, MG, TI), ceramic materials, polymers, composite materials (polymer matrix/metal matrix); corrosion, fatigue and creep failure; fracture and wear. Projects on selected topics.
ENGR 6461 Avionic Navigation Systems (4 credits)
Introduction: history of air navigation; earth coordinate and mapping systems; international navigation standards; airspace and air traffic control structure; basics of flight instruments and flight controls; fundamental concepts of navigation. Classification of modern avionic navigation systems. Basics of air traffic communication: radio wave propagation; VHF and HF systems. Short range, long range, approach/terminal area avionic navigation systems and radar systems: principles; design; advantages/disadvantages; errors; impact of global positioning system and future trends. Introduction to advanced integrated avionic systems. Projects on selected topics.
ENGR 6471 Integration of Avionics Systems (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6461.
Introduction to the basic principles of integration of avionics systems; review of Earth’s geometry and Newton’s laws; inertial navigation sensors and systems (INS); errors and uncertainty in navigation; global positioning system (GPS); differential and carrier tracking GPS applications; terrestrial radio navigation systems; Kalman filtering; integration of navigation systems using Kalman filtering; emphasis on integration of GPS and INS using Kalman filtering. A project is required.
ENGR 6501 Applied Elasticity (4 credits)
Plane stress and strain; analysis of stress and strain in three dimensions; Airy’s stress function; solution of two-dimensional problems by polynomials and Fourier series; effect of small holes in bars and plates; torsion and bending of prismatic bars; Membrane analogy; thermoelasticity; rectangular, circular, ring-shaped flat plates; applications in civil and mechanical engineering. A case study or a project is required.
ENGR 6151 Continuum Mechanics (4 credits)
This course presents the macroscopic mechanical behaviour of continuously distributed solid and fluid materials. This is a fundamental graduate course in the field of mechanical or aerospace engineering, which  covers basic principles of continuum mechanics and their engineering applications. All laws of continuum mechanics are formulated in terms of quantities that are independent of coordinates. Thus, in this course, first the concept of tensors is presented in detail as the linear transformation. This is followed by the formulation of the kinematics of very small and large deformation and the description of stresses and the basic laws of continuum mechanics common to all materials. Finally, constitutive equations governing the behaviours of idealized materials, including the elastic, hyperelastic and viscous materials, are presented as applications of these laws. A project is required.
ENGR 6511 Fundamentals of Finite Element Analysis of Structures (*) (4 credits)
Topics include matrix formulation of the force and of the displacement methods of analysis; direct stiffness approach, finite element methods for structural analysis; truss, beam, plane strain, plane stress, shell and solid elements; computer applications. A project is required.
ENGR 6531 The Finite Element Method in Structural Mechanics (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6511.
Displacement analysis of structures; finite elements of a continuum; applications of the method to stress analysis of two-and three-dimensional structures; stability problems; vibrations and heat transfer; digital computer applications. A project is required.
ENGR 6541 Structural Dynamics (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6511.
Dynamic behaviour of structures; lumping of masses; motion of elastic framed structures caused by arbitrary disturbances; analytical and numerical methods of solution; approximate determinations of natural frequencies in elastic systems; dynamic response of framed structures in the inelastic range; continuous systems, introduction to approximate design methods. A case study or a project is required.
ENGR 6551 Theory of Elastic and Inelastic Stability (4 credits)
Analysis of elastic and inelastic stability of columns; frame buckling; beam-columns, strength of plates, shear webs and shells; torsiona; flexural buckling of thin-walled, open sections; snap-through; critical discussion of current design specifications; applications to structures. A case study or a project is required.
ENGR 6561 Theory of Plates and Shells (4 credits)
Analysis of deformation and stress in plates and flat slabs under transverse loads; various boundary conditions; numerical methods; membrane stresses and displacements in shells under various loading; bending theory of shells; limit analysis of rotationally symmetric plates and shells; applications to shell type structures such as folded plate structures; sandwich plates; shell roofs and pressure vessels. A case study or a project is required.
ENGR 6571 Energy Methods in Structural Mechanics (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6511.
Principles of virtual work, total potential and complementary energy. Reisner’s Principle. Introduction to calculus of variations. Ritz and Galerkin’s methods. Applications to frame, plate and shell structures. A project is required.
ENGR 6581 Introduction to Structural Dynamics (*) (4 credits)
Theory of vibrations. Dynamic response of simple structural systems. Effects of blast, wind, traffic and machinery vibrations. Basic concepts in earthquake resistant design. Computer applications. A case study or a project is required.
ENGR 6601 Principles of Solar Engineering (4 credits)
Prerequisite: BLDG 6541.
Magnitude and availability of the solar energy input, including seasonal and diurnal variations of direct beam radiation; spectral distribution of sunlight; scattering and absorption processes; diffuse radiation; influence of cloud cover. Magnitude and time variation of typical loads, including space heating and cooling water heating; dehumidification. Principles of passive and active methods of solar collection, thermal conversion, and energy storage. Analysis of systems and components, including treatment of thermal and turbulent losses; efficiency calculations; electrical analogies; impedance matching and system optimization. Economics of systems. A case study or a project is required.
ENGR 6611 Equipment Design for Solar Energy Conversion (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6201.
This course emphasizes the mechanical design of solar heating and cooling systems and consists of the following topics: thermodynamic analysis of radiation, collection and conversion of solar energy, selection and manufacturing of components such as collectors, piping, line insulation, heat exchangers, etc., solar cooling and dehumidification, control of solar energy systems, case studies and project experiences. A case study or a project is required.
ENGR 6661 Solar Energy Materials Science (4 credits)
The place of organisms and materials in the solar energy cycle; physical, chemical and optical phenomena. Selective absorbers: surfaces and films, emissivity, thermal conversion, role of crystal defects and phase interfaces in metals and semiconductors. Reflector characteristics and damage modes. Optical and mechanical properties of glass, polymer and composite windows. Photovoltaic: physics and materials. Chemical, thermal and photo stability. Thermal transfer and storage media: gaseous, aqueous, organic; phase change and particulate systems; stability and corrosive effects. A case study or a project is required.
ENGR 6811 Energy Resources: Conventional and Renewable (4 credits) Depletion of conventional energy sources. Emission of greenhouse gases from conventional power production systems. Principles of renewable energy systems; cogeneration of electrical and thermal energy, photovoltaic systems, wind power, fuel cells, hybrid systems. Hydrogen and other forms of energy storage for renewable power production. Integrated and small-scale renewable energy systems; independent versus grid-connected systems. A case study or a project is required.
ENGR 691 Topics in Engineering I (4 credits)
See Note in Topic Area E02
ENGR 692 Case Study and Report (1 credit)
Students complete a case study and submit a report on a topic related to the students’ discipline, supervised by a professor, and approved by the Graduate Program Director in students' home department. The case study and report must present a current engineering problem or practice related to the students' research interest.
Note: This course cannot be taken by students enrolled in the SOEN program.
ENGR 6951 Seminar on Space Studies (4 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of Instructor.
Introduction to the science and technology of spaceflight; remote sensing; human factors in space; automation and robotics; space law; space transportation systems; the space station; the Moon-Mars initiative; space utilization; interplanetary travel. Project on selected topic.
ENGR 6971 Project and Report I (4 credits)
See Requirements for the Degree in Engineering Programs section. Project: 8 hours per week.
ENGR 6981 Project and Report II (4 credits)
See Requirements for the Degree in Engineering Programs section. Project: 8 hours per week.
ENGR 6991 Project and Report III (5 credits)
See Requirements for the Degree in Engineering Programs section. Project: 10 hours per week.
ENGR 7011 Graduate Seminar in Mechanical and Industrial Engineering (1 credit)
Seminar: 2 hours per week.
ENGR 7121 Analysis and Design of Linear Multivariable Systems (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6131.
Representation of linear multivariable systems. Controllability, observability and canonical forms; poles and zeroes; multivariable system inverses; the linear quadratic regulator problem; the robust servomechanism problem; the minimal design problem; frequency-domain design techniques. Project: 2 hours per week.
ENGR 7131 Adaptive Control (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC, 6061, ENGR 6131.
Real-time parameter estimation; least-squares and regression models; recursive estimators; model reference adaptive systems (MRAS); MRAS based on gradient approach and stability theory; self-tuning regulators (STR); adaptive prediction and control; stability and convergence results, robustness issues; auto-tuning and gain scheduling; alternatives to adaptive control; practical aspects; implementation and applications. Project: 2 hours per week.
ENGR 7181 Digital Control of Dynamic Systems (4 credits)
Prerequisites: ELEC 6061, ENGR 6131.
Review of discrete-time and sampled-data systems; discrete input-output and state-space equivalents; controllability and observability of sampled-data systems; controller design using transform techniques, design using state-space methods; generalized sample-data hold functions; optimal control; quantization effects; multi-rate sampling; robust control; discrete-time non-linear systems; discrete-time multivariable systems. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for ENGR 6181 may not take this course for credit.
ENGR 7201 Micro-Gravity Fluid Dynamics (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6201.
Forces and accelerations in space environment; zero-gravity simulation, free falling capsules, flights in Keplerian trajectories, sounding rockets, and the space station; surface tension; main non-dimensional parameters; Laplace-Young equation; contact angle; Dupre’s equation; Neumann’s triangle; minimization principle associated with Laplace’s equation; equilibrium shapes of a liquid, small oscillations of ideal and viscous fluids, liquid handling problems at low gravity, liquid positioning and control, vortexing capillary; numerical simulations of liquid dynamics in microgravity environment. Projects on selected topics.
ENGR 7331 Random Vibrations (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6311.
Mathematical descriptions of stochastic processes; spectral density and correlation functions; Gaussian and non-Gaussian random processes; Markov processes and Fokker/Planck equation; response of linear and nonlinear oscillatory systems to random excitation; non-stationary and narrow-band random processes. Project on selected research topic or applications.
ENGR 7401 Robotic Manipulators II: Control (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6411.
Control of a single link manipulator; position, velocity and acceleration errors; control of a multiple link manipulator sensor: vision, proximity, touch, slip, force, compliance and force controlled robots. Computer control of robots, command languages. Introduction to intelligent robots. Project on selected topics of current interest.
ENGR 7461 Avionic Systems Design (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6461.
Definitions, purpose, history and evolution of avionic systems; cockpit displays configurations, classifications, and design considerations; ARINC communication bus system standards; air data computer system; navigation systems; automatic flight control systems; monitoring/warning/alert systems; flight management systems; system integration; advanced concepts and future trends. Projects on selected topics.
ENGR 7501 Advanced Finite Element Method in Structural Mechanics (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6511 or equivalent.
Topics include finite elements of a continuum; applications of the method to stress analysis of two- and three-dimensional structures; stability problems; vibrations and heat transfer; non-linear methods; computer applications. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken ENGR 6531 may not take this course for credit.
ENGR 7521 Advanced Matrix Analysis of Structures (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6511.
Displacement method for two- and three-dimensional analysis of structures. Nonlinear large displacement analysis by stiffness method. Matrix formulations of vibration and stability problems. Computer applications. A project is required.
ENGR 7531 Boundary Element Method in Applied Mechanics (4 credits)
Boundary integral formulations of Axi-Symmetric, two- and three-dimensional potential and elastostatic problems. Treatment of thermal effects, singularity elements, infinite boundary elements. Coupling of boundary elements and finite elements. Introduction to non-linear, elastostatic problems. Numerical implementation. A case study or a project is required.
ENGR 791 Topics in Engineering II
See Note in Topic Area E02
ENGR 7961 Industrial “Stage” and Training (6 credits)
Prerequisite: Completion of at least twelve credits in the composite option and at least twenty-one credits in the aerospace program or permission of program director.
This is an integral component of the aerospace program and the composites option in the Mechanical Engineering program that is to be completed under the supervision of an experienced engineer in the facilities of a participating company (Canadian work permit is required). The topic is to be decided by a mutual agreement between the student, the participating company and the program director. The course is graded on the basis of the student’s performance during the work period, which includes a technical report.
ENGR 8901 Master of Applied Science Research and Thesis (29 credits)
See Requirements for the Degree in Engineering Programs section.
ENGR 8911 Doctoral Research and Thesis (70 credits)
See Requirements for the Degree in Engineering Programs section.
Information Systems Engineering
INSE 6100 Advanced Java Platforms (4 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the CIISE is required.
This course emphasizes the architecture and the inner workings of the Java virtual machine; 3 distributions of the Java Platform: the micro-addition, the standard addition and the enterprise addition; the JCP process and the Java standards purposed as API extensions; semantic foundations of Java: static semantics and dynamic semantics. Introduction of technologies that are used to accelerate (performance analysis, hardware accelerators, ahead-of-time, just-in-time, selected dynamic compilation and component-based acceleration) and secure (virtual machines, such as vulnerability analysis, Java security models, byte-code verification, access controllers, security managers, policy files, and certified compilation) Java. Semantic correctness of acceleration and security techniques will also be addressed. A project is required.
INSE 6110 Foundations of Cryptography (4 credits)
Introduction to cryptography and cryptanalysis, classical ciphers, number-theoretic reference problems, the integer factorization problem, the RSA problem, the quadratic residuosity problem, computing square roots in Zn, the discrete logarithmic problem, the diffie-hellman problem, pseudorandom bits and sequences, stream ciphers: feedback shift registers, LFSRs, RC4. Block Ciphers: SPN and Fiestel structures, DES, AES, linear cryptanalysis, differential cryptanalysis, side channel attacks, ciphertext indistinguishability, attack analysis, IND-CPA, IND-CCA, IND-CCA2, public key encryption: RSA, Rabin, ElGamal, elliptic curves cryptography, hash functions: Un-keyed hash functions, MACs, Attacks, Digital signatures: RSA, Fiat-Shamir, DSA, public key infrastructure, key management, efficient implementation of ciphers, zero-knowledge proof. A project is required.
INSE 6120 Crypto-Protocol and Network Security (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INSE 6110 or equivalent.
Cryptographic protocols, authentication protocols, key distributions protocols, e-commerce protocols, fair-exchange and contract-signing protocols, security protocol properties: authentication, secrecy, integrity, availability, non-repudiation, atomicity, certified delivery, crypto-protocol attacks, design principles for security protocols, automatic analysis, public key infrastructure, models and architectures for network security, authentication using Kerberos and X.509, email security (PGP, S/MIME), IP security, SSL/TLS protocols, virtual private networks, firewalls intrusion detection, host-based IDS, network based IDS, misuse detection methods, anomaly detection methods, intrusion detection in distributed systems, intrusion detection in wireless ad hoc networks botnet detection, analysis and mitigation, darknet traffic analysis, prediction and forecast of network threats, network security monitoring. A project is required.
INSE 6130 Operating Systems Security (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INSE 6110 or equivalent.
System security, Windows security, Linux security, Unix security, access control matrix, HRU result, OS security mechanisms, security administration, access control list, capability list, role-based access control, security policy, mandatory and discretionary access control, multi-level security, BLP policy, Biba model, conflict of interest, Chinese Wall policy, secure booting, authentication, password security, challenge response, auditing and logging, system kernel security, threat analysis, security attacks, security hardened operating, host-based intrusion detection, securing network services, firewalls and border security, registry security, embedded and real-time OS security, information flow control. A project is required.
INSE 6140 Malware Defenses and Application Security (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INSE 6110 or equivalent.
Malicious code, taxonomy, viruses, worms, trojan horses, logical and temporal bombs, infection process, security properties of applications, safety, high level security, detection approaches, ad hoc techniques: scanning, anti-virus technology, obfuscation, dynamic analysis for security: passive and active monitoring, in-line and reference monitors, sandboxing, static analysis for security: data and control flow analysis for security, type-based analysis for security, anti-reverse-engineering protection, software fingerprinting, self-certified code: certifying compilers, proof carrying code, efficient code certification, typed assembly languages, certificate generation, certificate verification and validation, C and C++ security, java security, byte-code verification, access controllers, security managers, permission files, security APIs, critical APIs, protection domains, security profiles, mobile code security. A project is required.
INSE 6150 Security Evaluation Methodologies (4 credits)
Security evaluation of information systems, security evaluation of software, security evaluation of products. Security code inspection, security testing, security standards, preparation of a security evaluation: impact scale, likelihood scale, severity scale. Vulnerability analysis, risk analysis, security plan elaboration. ITSEC, MARION, and MEHARI methods, OCTAVE, common criteria, target of evaluation, protection profile, security functional requirement, security factors, errors, accidents, assurance requirements, assurance levels, evaluation process, compliance with the protection profile, IT security ethics, privacy, digital copyright, licensing IT security products, computer fraud and abuse, incident handling, business records, security forensics, security evaluation case studies. Information security governance: risk management, business strategy, standards, COBIT. Situation awareness. A project is required.
INSE 6160 Database Security and Privacy (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INSE 6110 or equivalent.
Access control in relational databases; grant/revoke model; security by views; query modification; Oracle VPD; auditing in databases; information warfare in databases; multi-level database security; polyinstantiation and covert channel; statistical database security; inference control; security by auditing; microdata security; random perturbation; outsourced database security, encrypted databases; SQL injection attack; anomaly detection in databases; data privacy, P3P; Hippocratic databases; perfect secrecy-based privacy; k-anonymity model; l-diversity; data utility measure, data release with public algorithms, multi-party privacy preserving computation; privacy in OLAP. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for INSE 691A (Database Security and Privacy) may not take this course for credit.
INSE 6170 Network Security Architecture and Management (4 credits)
Security architecture and management, risk and threats, security attributes and properties, security design principles, security standards, security defence toolkit, and security building blocks, corporate VoIP, residential IPTV, IMS, cloud services, security functions and their implementation, operational considerations of deployment and management of security, configuration, vulnerability management and updates, incident management, emerging challenges and innovative solutions. A project is required.
INSE 6180 Security and Privacy Implications of Data Mining (4 credits)
Introduction to data mining and its applications; privacy legislations security and privacy threats caused by current data mining techniques; risks and challenges in emerging data mining applications; attacks and prevention methods: web privacy attacks, data mining-based intrusion detection; privacy-preserving data mining; privacy-preserving data publishing. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for INSE 691D (Security Implications of Data Mining) may not take this course for credit.
INSE 6190 Wireless Network Security (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INSE 6110 or equivalent.
Introduction to wireless network security; security issues in cellular networks; authentication/key management in wireless LAN; secure handover; security in mobile IP; security issues in mobile ad-hoc networks: trust establishment, secure routing, anonymity; anonymous sensory data collection; privacy for smartphone applications. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for INSE 691B (Wireless Security) may not take this course for credit.
INSE 6210 Total Quality Methodologies in Engineering (4 credits)
Methodologies for quality engineering: six sigma, ACE (Achieving Competitive Excellence), Lean engineering, ISO9000 series; comparative study, quality clinic process charts, relentless root cause analysis, mistake proofing, market feedback analysis, process improvement and waste elimination, visual control, standard work and process management, process certification, setup reduction, total productive maintenance, DMAIC and DMADV processes, define phase, project charter, project scoping and planning, measure phase, critical to quality requirements, quality functional deployment, analyze phase, functional and process requirements, design requirements, design concepts, high-level design capability elaboration and evaluation, design phase, detailed design capability elaboration and evaluation, failure mode and effects analysis, control and verification plans, verify phase, pilot-scale processes, pilot testing and evaluation, implementation planning, full-scale processes, start-up and testing, performance evaluation, turnover to operations and maintenance, transition to process management, project closure. A project is required.
INSE 6220 Advanced Statistical Approaches to Quality (4 credits)
Introduction to quality control and total quality, statistical concepts and techniques in quality control, graphical methods for data presentation and quality improvement, statistical basis for control charts, pattern analysis in control charts, control charts for variables, control charts for individual measurements, control charts for attributes, process capability analysis, CUSUM charts and EWMA charts, acceptance sampling by attributes, acceptance plans by variables, reliability models, reliability and life testing plans, multivariate quality control, multivariate methods, aspects of multivariate analysis, multivariate normal distribution, multivariate tests of hypotheses, multivariate analysis of variance, principal components analysis, factor analysis, discrimination and classification, multivariate quality control, multivariate linear regression, design of experiments (DOE), Taguchi method, completely randomized design (CRD), randomized complete block design (RCBD), incomplete block designs, latin square designs, graeco-latin square designs, factorial designs, fractional factorial designs, split plot designs, and nested designs (compared to cross-over designs), quality in the service sector, service industries and their characteristics, model for service quality and applications. A project is required.
INSE 6230 Total Quality Project Management (4 credits)
Role of a project manager, learning and applications, project management processes, project management in quality initiatives, intellectual property protection, customer project management and critical-to-quality requirements, project planning and execution, team formation, goals, roles, procedures and interpersonal relationship, types of teams, creating a project plan, project tracking, project compliance requirements, sourcing and supplier qualification, government contract data rights, government property, risk management process, action planning, project communication, customer, team and stakeholder communications, communication planning and strategy, web-based collaboration, project management software tools. A project is required.
INSE 6240 Executive Communication (1 credit)
Communication plan elaboration, preparing presentations, developing a sound strategy, organizing for effectiveness, capturing the audience, the impromptu speech, introducing a speaker, reading a paper, leading a conference, interpersonal communication, use of voice, active listening, assertive speaking, giving and receiving feedback, assertive techniques, work styles, conflict and dispute resolution, negotiation, managing difficult situations, writing skills, interpersonal communications, business letters, formal reports, communication technology. A project is required.
INSE 6250 Quality Methodologies for Software (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INSE 6210 or equivalent, COMP 5541 or equivalent.
Quality methodologies for software, calculating sigma values, graphical analysis, quality processes for software, MAIC, DMADV, define overview, project context, initial analysis and design, lifecycle and multi-generational planning, project management, risk analysis, measure overview, customer needs, quality functional deployment for software, software metrics and requirements, scorecards, meta-models, specification languages (SDL, B, Z, etc.), software modelling (UML, Core, IDEF, etc.), graphical languages, design and verify overview, failure mode and effect analysis for software, defensive programming, smart and simple design, peer reviews, performance analysis, statistical tools, software testing, software verification. A project is required.
INSE 6260 Software Quality Assurance (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INSE 6210 or equivalent, COMP 5541 or equivalent.
Quality assurance, quality factors, components of a software quality assurance system, contract review, software development and quality plans, activities and alternatives, integration of quality activities in a project lifecycle, reviews, software inspection, software verification, testing processes, static analysis, control-flow analysis, data-flow analysis, control-flow testing, loop testing, data-flow testing, transaction-flow testing, domain testing, type-based analysis, dynamic analysis, usage models, operational profiles, result and defect analysis, reliability, performance analysis, maintenance and reverse engineering, case tools and software quality assurance. A project is required.
INSE 6270 Quality-Based Systems Engineering (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INSE 6210 or equivalent.
System engineering, quality-based system development process, acquisition and specification of system requirements, system design and prototyping, system implementation and testing, modelling languages for system engineering (SysML, IDEF, CORE, etc.), exchange mechanisms for system engineering data (AP233, XMI, etc.) gathering, specification, formulation, and refinement of system requirements, customer requirements, market requirements, technical requirements, implementation requirements, eco-requirements (scenario-based requirements gathering and refinement, affinity diagram, analytic hierarchy analysis), conflict resolution (TRIZ), management of system requirements in the design process (axiomatic design, decision tree, morphology matrix, systematic design), management of system requirements in the implementation process (six-sigma, ACE, Lean, ISO 9000, ERP, SAP, CMMS), case studies. A project is required.
INSE 6280 Quality Assurance for Systems Engineering (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INSE 6210 or equivalent, previously or concurrently.
Introduction to quality assurance and quality factors in systems engineering, components of a quality assurance system, principles of verification, validation and accreditation of systems, Vvsystem modelling languages, model semantics, techniques for V principles of system simulation (types of problems, simulation systems and their classification, principles of simulation system design and implementation), verification and validation techniques for simulation models (problem entity, conceptual model, and computerized model), development of simulation platforms, standards for system simulation, high level architecture (HLA). A project is required.
INSE 6290 Quality in Supply Chain Design (4 credits)
Evolution of supply chain, lingo, notation, master planning, role in business, performance analysis, activity profiling, strategic quality planning for supply chain, inventory planning and management (IP&M), perfect order percentage, inventory turns, fill rates and substitutions, purchase and customer order cycle times, customer service and order processing (CS&OP), network planning, supply contracts, distribution strategies, coordinated product and supply chain design, quality and innovation in product design, design for maintainability, designing for reliability, environmental considerations in supply chain design, designing quality services, make, buy, and sourcing analysis, supplier partnerships, global sourcing active assembly, supply chain management systems, efficient transportation, efficient warehousing, impact of e-commerce on supply chains, information technology and decision support systems, e-business strategies, e-business transactions, e-commerce platforms for supply chain. A project is required.
INSE 6300 Quality Assurance in Supply Chain Management (4 credits)
Supply chain management, definition, models, evolution and evaluation, quality attributes, evaluation criteria, key supply chain management issues, supply chain cost reduction opportunities, sales and operating planning hierarchy, gathering data required for sales and operation planning, inventory management techniques, effective supply chain management, supply and demand synchronization, aligning customer demands to order fulfillment, management of supply chain constraints, supply chain performance measurements, supply chain Information, communication, security, information flows, security measures, global supply chain quality and international quality standards, customer driven quality, managing supplier quality in the supply chain, the tools of quality; statistically based quality improvement for variables and attributes; managing quality improvement teams and projects. A project is required.
INSE 6310 Systems Engineering Maintenance Management (4 credits)
Maintenance concepts in engineering systems; component replacement; optimal component preventive replacement intervals; age-based replacement models for components; spare parts provision; optimal inspection decisions; condition based maintenance systems; proportional hazards model; capital equipment replacement; maintenance resource planning; reliability centered maintenance; equipment degradation analysis; degradation prediction; maintenance information system; maintenance software. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for INSE 691C (Systems Engineering Maintenance Management) may not take this course for credit.
INSE 6311 Sustainable Infrastructure Planning and Management Systems (4 credits)
This multi-disciplinary course will provide the basic knowledge for developing advanced information systems that can be used to systematically plan and manage infrastructure (e.g. roads and bridges) throughout its lifecycle, including environmental impact assessment. The course will cover the following topics: Definition and history of Infrastructure, Types and functions of Infrastructure, Infrastructure Planning, Performance Modelling, Failure Analysis and Reliability Issues, Infrastructure Inspection and Monitoring, Maintenance and Rehabilitation Strategies, Environmental Management and Sustainability Issues, and Integrated Infrastructure Management Systems. Projects.
INSE 6320 Risk Analysis for Information and Systems Engineering (4 credits)
Introduction to risk analysis theory. Risk assessment methodologies, risk assessment techniques and standards for information systems, review of probability theory, hazard identification, fault tree analysis, event tree analysis, sensitivity analysis, qualitative risk analysis, quantitative risk analysis, case studies on information systems, value analysis and integrated risk management. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for INSE 691H (Risk Analysis for Information and Systems Engineering) may not take this course for credit.
INSE 6400 Principles of Systems Engineering (4 credits)
Origins of systems engineering; modern engineering systems; structure of complex systems; systems life cycle; systems engineering management; system decomposition and architecture; systems with uncertain and imperfect information; structural and dynamics modelling; integration and evaluation: production, operation and support; systems engineering decision tools; special topics: systems of systems, sustainability, mass collaboration. A project is required.
INSE 6411 Product Design Theory and Methodology (4 credits)
This course introduces main design theories and methodologies for the conceptual and configuration design of mechanical/manufacturing systems. It includes the following topics: general design process; introduction to design theory and methodologies; user requirements analysis; structure of design problem; design concept and product configuration generation methods; evaluation of design concepts and product configuration; sources and resolution strategies of design conflicts; computer-assistance of all these tasks; and case studies of product design. A project is required.
INSE 6421 Systems Integration and Testing (4 credits)
Introduction to integration and testing of complex systems; fundamentals of project planning; process analysis; workflow modelling; six sigma tools and methodologies for systems integration; formulation of systems operational assessment and concept; systems architecture, functions and capabilities composition and packaging into high-level system architecture; modelling and analysis methods for representing system functionality and capability; interface description and management; testability and interoperability testing; management issues pertaining to integrated product teams, vendors, suppliers, and subcontractors. A project is required.
INSE 6431 Ad Hoc Wireless Networks: Architectures and Protocols (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6851, COMP 6461 or equivalent.
Design, provisioning and management of ad hoc wireless networks. Concepts, architectures and protocols related to the efficient design and high performance of ad hoc wireless networks. Medium access control schemes; mathematical analysis. Analysis of access protocols in multihop networks; derive the system capacity. Study of various control knobs for improving the network capacity; power control, physical carrier sense turning, rate control, interference mitigation, and channel diversity. Study emerging issues such as supporting quality of service in wireless networks; security issues in wireless networks, broadband wireless access; wireless mesh networks; their integration with wired networks; vehicular ad hoc networks and related protocols. A project is required.
INSE 6441 Applied Game Theory and Mechanism Design (4 credits)
Fundamentals of game theory; equilibrium concepts; strategic games; extensive games; Bayesian games; game strategies in network security; game theory for trust and reputation; fundamentals of mechanism design; optimal mechanisms; efficient mechanisms; incentive compatibility; incentives and information security; revelation principle and trust; analysis tools; applications: security protocols, supply chain, trust and reputation, social networks. A project is required.
INSE 6510 Video Game Technology and Development (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COMP 5511 or equivalent, previously or concurrently.
This course is part development and part technology, and will cover the process of commercial video game development, and software design patterns used for game design. The course provides an in-depth understanding of how the game design process works. Students work with a game engine software framework to design and implement several kinds of games. Video game history. Basic Building blocks of a game. Elements of game design. Game Maker: objects, sprites, events. Space Shooter. Developing games with Games Factory. Real Time Strategy game development. A project is required.
INSE 6530 3D Graphics and Computer Animation for Game Design (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COMP 6761 or equivalent, previously or concurrently.
Application of 3D graphics and animation topics to non real-time rendered media. Current research topics in computer animation such as dynamic simulation of flexible and rigid objects, automatically-generated control systems, and evolution of behaviours. History of Animation. Animation Basics. Keyframe Animation. Path Animation. Non-Linear Animation. Modelling Concerns for Animation. Rigging for Forward and Inverse Kinematics. Morphing. Expressions. Particle Systems. Dynamics. A project is required.
INSE 6610 Cybercrime Investigations (4 credits)
Introduction to cybercrimes: unauthorized access, mischief to data, possession of hacking tools, possession of child pornography; Legal aspects: Canadian judicial system, computer crime laws, charter of rights, common law, mutual legal assistance treaty, search warrants, production and assistance orders, international laws, upcoming legal changes; Investigation process: search planning, acquisition methods, environment recognition, evidence identification; Reporting process: investigation and analysis reports, notes taking; authority of seizure; forensic interviews; Computer crime trials: witness preparation, court sentencing, rebuttal witness, cross-examination, testimony, credibility attacks; in-depth case studies. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for INSE 691E (Cybercrime Investigations) may not take this course for credit.
INSE 6620 Cloud Computing Security and Privacy (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INSE 6110 or equivalent.
Cloud computing concepts, SOA and cloud, virtualization and cloud, cloud service delivery models, cloud storage models, cloud deployment scenarios, public/ private/ hybrid/ community cloud, cloud computing architectures, SaaS, PaaS, IaaS, agility, scalability and elasticity of cloud, cloud security, cloud privacy, homomorphic encryption, searching encrypted cloud data, secure data outsourcing, secure computation outsourcing, proof of data possession / retrievability, virtual machine security, trusted computing in clouds, cloud-centric regulatory compliance, business and security risk models, cloud user security, identity management in cloud, SAML, applications of secure cloud computing.
INSE 6630 Recent Developments in Information Systems Security (4 credits)
Prerequisites: Any two of INSE 6110, INSE 6120, INSE 6130, or INSE 6140.
Security and privacy legislations. New security threats and solution on personal computers, enterprise computers, personal information, confidential information, identity fraud, financial fraud, and social networking. Recent developments in trusted computing for critical cyber infrastructure, privacy-aware information sharing, cybercrime, and cyber forensics techniques. Cyber espionage, cyber terrorism, and cyber war. A project is required.
INSE 6640 Smart Grids and Control System Security (4 credits)
Overview of electric grid operation, evolution to the smart grid, smart grid components, dynamic pricing, promotion of “green” resources, governmental regulation, network standards, consumer privacy, risks to the smart grid, physical security and protections against tampering for smart grid environments, device level security, authorization and access control, consumer privacy protection, cryptographic mechanisms for smart grid environments, secure key management, communication security in smart grid, privacy of user data for Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI), security standards for smart grid, supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA), SCADA architecture, SCADA Security, SCADA monitoring, SCADA systems for smart grids, distributed control systems (DCS), communication infrastructure. A project is required.
INSE 6650 Trusted Computing (4 credits)
Hardware and software root of trust; establishing and attesting trust of software systems; Trusted Platform Module (TPM); CPU support for trusted computing, including existing technologies such as Intel Trusted Execution Technology (TXT), AMD Secure Virtual Machine (SVM), ARM TrustZone; secure crypto processors such as Hardware Security Modules (HSMs); bank HSM APIs and their weaknesses; attestation protocols; OS support for trusted computing; security tokens (e.g., second factor of authentication, smartcards, transaction verification code); trusted user interface; use cases: digital rights management (DRM), authentication, protected execution of security sensitive code, trusted kiosk computing, full disk encryption, malware exploiting trusted computing infrastructure; hardware and software attacks; privacy issues. A project is required.
INSE 6660 Secure Programming (4 credits)
Topics include fundamentals of secure programming; string-related vulnerabilities and defence. Pointer-related vulnerabilities and defence; memory management-related vulnerabilities and defence. Integer-related security issues; formatted output-related security issues; concurrency-related security issues; security vulnerabilities and linking; security in sockets programming; security vulnerabilities and signals; file I/O security; best practices and coding standards; design principles for secure programming; model-based secure programming; static analysis for secure programming. A project is required.
INSE 6670 Embedded Systems Security (4 credits)
Topics of this course include embedded and real-time embedded systems; embedded systems security and trust; monitoring of embedded systems; security and protection objectives for hardware; adversaries, attacks; trusted integrated circuits (TIC); hardware assisted security and trust; process reliability and security; secure program execution on embedded processors; networks on chip; secure memory access; hardware trusted platforms; secure processors; efficient security processing; energy efficient security; cryptographic processors; physical one-way functions (POWF); PUF-based security; FSM model of computation; hiding information in FSM/IC piracy protection by active hardware metering; remote enabling and disabling of ICs; watermarking for intellectual property protection (IPP); physical and invasive attacks, side-channel attacks; zero knowledge proofs; FPGA security; FPGA fingerprinting and access; hardware trojan horses. Applications (automotive domain, internet of things, cyber-physical systems, SCADA, sensor networks). A project is required.
INSE 6680 Systems Physical Security (4 credits)
Topics of this course include identifying potential security threats and vulnerabilities, threat and risk assessment; security equipment and systems (access control and biometrics technology, surveillance systems, network infrastructure supporting security technology); physical security of information systems; maximizing the value of security systems; securing transported materials; emergency management and risk mitigation; critical infrastructure protection. Overview of the Canadian Operational Standard on Physical Security, Policy on Government Security and U.S. National Response Framework. A project is required.
INSE 691 Topics in Information Systems Engineering (4 credits)
Note: Subject will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for these courses providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g., INSE 691A, INSE 691B, etc.
INSE 6961 Graduate Seminar in Information and Systems Engineering (1 credit)
Students must attend a set of seminars identified by the Concordia Institute for Information Systems Engineering and submit a comprehensive report on the topics presented in three of the seminars. This course is graded on a pass/fail basis.
INSE 7100 Design and Analysis of Security Protocols (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COEN 6311 or equivalent.
The primary objective of this course is to present the methods used in the design and analysis of modern security protocols, introduction to existing cryptographic protocols. The most important security proprieties (such as authentication, secrecy, integrity, availability, atomicity, certified delivery and other properties), flaw taxonomy (such as freshness attacks, type attacks, parallel session attacks, implementation dependent attacks, binding attacks, encapsulation attacks and other forms of attack). Cryptographic protocol specification (general-purpose formal languages, logical languages, operational languages and security calculi). Cryptographic protocol analysis (security logics analysis, model-based and algebraic analysis, process algebra analysis, type based analysis). Limitations of formal methods and ad-hoc techniques, project will be offered in analyzing a number of published cryptographic protocols. The focus of this course will be on the design and the analysis of security protocols. A project is required.
INSE 7110 Value Added Service Engineering in Next Generation Networks (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6861 or equivalent.
Telecommunications service engineering, or more simply service engineering, is the discipline that addresses the technologies and engineering process for the specification, implementation, testing, deployment, usage of value added services in telecommunication networks, value added services, or more simply services, can be defined as anything that goes beyond two party voice calls. They are either call related (e.g. call diversion, multiparty gaming, conducted conferences) or non-call related (e.g. customized stock quotes, web surfing from a cellular phone). Some services may combine call related and non-call related features (e.g. call centres). This course will cover the basics of service engineering (such as basic concepts, value added services, service life cycle, service engineering, intelligent networks, WAP/Imode/TINE-C). The basics of next generation networks (such as session initiation protocol (SIP), H.323, Megaco, H.248, 3GPP/3GPP2 architecture, softswitch). Signaling protocol-specific approaches (such as H.232 supplementary services, SIP CGI, SIP servlet API). Signaling protocol neutral approaches (such as CPL, JAIN JCC/JCAT, PARLAY; web services). Approaches at the research stage (such as context awareness; mobile code-based approaches). A project is required.
INSE 7120 Advanced Network Management (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ELEC 6861 or equivalent.
Network management – basics (history and basic definitions, management frameworks, functional areas). The simple network management protocol framework (history, protocol architecture, functional architecture, information architecture, RMON, management by delegation, distributed management and JASMIN NIB, case studies). OSI systems management, TNM and other frameworks (OSI communication, information and functional models, TMN functional, physical and information architecture, case study, CORBA based management, web based management, DTMF, JMX). Interoperability issue and in-depth study of a specific functional area overview of known techniques (e.g. dual MIBs), alarm filtering techniques (e.g. artificial intelligence), alarm correlation techniques (e.g. artificial intelligence, coding theory). Approaches still a research level (mobile agent based network management, active network based network management, policy based artwork management, use of SML/web services). A project is required.
INSE 8901 Master of Applied Science Research and Thesis (25 credits)
Students must complete a 25-credit thesis as part of their degree requirements. The thesis must represent the results of the student’s independent work after admission to the program. The proposed topic for the thesis, together with a brief statement outlining the proposed method of treatment, and the arrangement made for faculty supervision, must be approved by the GCS  Graduate Studies Committee. For purposes of registration, this work will be designated as INSE 8901. The thesis will be evaluated by the student’s supervisor(s), and at least two examiners appointed by the GCS Graduate Studies Committee, one of whom shall be external to the student’s department.
Mechanical, Industrial and Aerospace Engineering
INDU 691 Topics in Industrial Engineering (4 credits)
Note: Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for these courses provided that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. INDU 691A, INDU 691B, etc.
INDU 6111 Theory of Operations Research (4 credits)
This course introduces the fundamentals of convex analysis such as polyhedral sets and the representation theorem. Advanced topics in linear optimization are also covered, such as state-of-the-art solution methods (revised and dual simplex methods, path following interior point methods), duality theory and parametric analysis, Farkas lemma, and KKT optimality conditions. An introduction to other advanced topics (Dantzig-Wolfe decomposition, dynamic programming, and stochastic decision processes) is given. A project is required.
INDU 6121 Applied Optimization (4 credits)
Topics include model building in optimization, model validation, economic interpretation, sensitivity analysis, algorithms and commercial optimization software for problem solving. Mathematical models in deterministic and nondeterministic settings with linear, integer, and nonlinear programming formulations are developed. Applications of optimization models in production, transportation, finance, scheduling, and healthcare systems are presented. A project is required.
INDU 6131 Graph Theory with System Applications (4 credits)
Basic concepts; trees, circuits and cutsets; Eulerian and Hamiltonian graphs; directed graphs; matrices of a graph, graphs and vector spaces; planarity and duality; connectivity, matching and colouring; flows in networks: max-flow min-cut theorem, minimum cost flows; optimization on graphs: minimum-cost spanning trees, optimum branching and shortest paths. Project: two hours per week.
Note: Students who have taken ENGR 6111 may not receive credit for this course.
INDU 6141 Logistics Network Models (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INDU 6121.
This course covers the following wide range of operational issues in the transportation and logistics industry. Different analytical models and their solution strategies are also introduced. Overview of transportation systems including airlines, railways, ocean liners, cargo, energy transportation and pipelines; Supply chain characterization; Site location;Distribution planning; Vehicle routing; Fleet scheduling; Crew scheduling; Demand management; Replenishment management; Revenue management; Geographic information systems; Real-time network control issues. A project is required.
INDU 6151 Decision Models in Service Sector (*) (4 credits)
Introduction to service strategy and operations. Service demand forecasting and development of new services. Service facility location and layout planning. Applications of decision models in service operations and service quality control. Cost analysis, queuing models, risk management and resource allocation models for service decisions. Service outsourcing and supply chain issues. Efficiency and effectiveness issues in different service sectors such as emergency force deployment, municipal resource allocation and health care. Case studies using operations research, operations management, and statistical techniques. A project is required.
INDU 6161 Design and Operations of Supply Chain Networks (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INDU 6121.
This course analyzes various supply chain operation issues from an engineering point of view. The course covers topics such as: supply chain issues and opportunities; performance evaluation of supply chains; supply chain planning and optimization; collaborative decision making in supply chains; transportation planning in supply chains; capacity planning in supply chains; designing global supply chains; risk management in supply chains; sustainable supply chain management. A project is required.
INDU 6211 Production Systems and Inventory Control (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INDU 6121.
This course covers various operational and planning issues in manufacturing industry: Integrated production planning and control. Large scale model development for demand forecasting, materials requirements planning and manufacturing resource planning (MRP/MRPII), production-inventory systems, production planning; models for line balancing, lot sizing, dispatching, scheduling, releasing. Models for inventory control, determination of order quantities and safety stocks, inventory replenishment systems. Supply chain management. Just-in-Time systems, lean and Agile manufacturing. A project is required.
INDU 6221 Lean Enterprise (4 credits)
This course covers topics that are necessary to establish a lean culture at the system level in various organizations:Introduction to principles of the lean enterprise, process management, waste elimination and process variation, five S’s and workplace organization, lean analysis tools and performance measurements, Lean Six Sigma, enterprise value stream mapping, visual workplace, lean product development, lean business administration. A project is required.
INDU 6231 Scheduling Theory (4 credits)
Models for sequencing and scheduling activities including: static and dynamic problems; deterministic and stochastic models. Single machine processing; parallel machine processing; multistage problems including flow-shops and job-shops. Complexity issues. Exact and heuristic solution methods. Average and worst case performance analysis of heuristic methods. Applications in manufacturing environments. Current research trends. Project: two hours per week.
Note: Students who have taken ENCS 6201 may not receive credit for this course.
INDU 6241 Lean Manufacturing (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INDU 6211.
Introduction to the basic principles and concepts of lean manufacturing; tools of lean manufacturing, including value stream mapping, standardized work, setup reduction; mapping the current state; mixed model value streams; mapping the future state; Takt time, finished goods strategy, continuous flow, level pull, pacemaker, pitch, interval; implementing the future state. A project is required.
INDU 6251 Facilities Planning and Warehouse Operations (4 credits)
This course is designed to provide advanced concepts, theory and procedures for the study of facilities location, physical layouts, material flow, and material handling, warehouse operations planning and management systems, warehouse design, automation and control. Analytical procedures are developed to enhance the decision-making process in the design, rationalization and improvement of manufacturing or service facilities. The knowledge learned in this course is integrated with knowledge from related courses to develop a design project. A project is required.
INDU 6310 Applied Probability and Statistics for Engineers (4 credits)
This course introduces probability and statistics concepts frequently used in engineering applications. Probability theory, randomness, conditional probability, joint probability, independence and probability distributions are covered. Data collection, sampling, confidence intervals, hypothesis formulation, errors, estimation topics are given. Linear and  non-linear regression, analysis of residuals and remedial measures, transformation of data, multiple, polynomial and weighted regression, model selection techniques, and joint confidence regions concepts are taught with relevant industry applications. Statistical packages are introduced. A project is required.
Note: This course may not be taken by MASc and PhD students for credit.
INDU 6311 Discrete System Simulation (4 credits)
Probability theory and queuing theory; discrete and continuous variables and their distributions; deterministic and stochastic models; building valid and credible models. Computer simulation of discrete-change systems subject to uncertainty techniques to verify quality of input data; analysis of output data; determination of simulation run-length and number of replications; random number generations, variance reduction techniques, transient and steady state behaviour; comparison of alternative systems. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken ENGR 6491 may not receive credit for this course.
INDU 6321 Introduction to Six Sigma (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INDU 6331.
Overview of the Six Sigma concept; Six Sigma deployment practice; Six Sigma methodologies for process improvement and process (DMAIC) and for product design (DMADV); Integration of Lean techniques in Six Sigma (Lean Six Sigma); Overview of different quality management tools applied in Six Sigma; Application of Designed of Experiments in Six Sigma; Design for Six Sigma through the application of the Robust Parameter Design; Six Sigma project management. A project is required.
INDU 6331 Advanced Quality Control (4 credits)
Introduction to advanced quality control and improvement concepts. Fundamentals of statistical methods and theoretical basis for quality control methods. Advanced and newly developed quality control and improvement methods such as modified and acceptance charts, multiple stream process control, control charts with adaptive sampling and engineering process control for quality. International standards of acceptance sampling. Economic design and implications of quality control and improvement procedures. A project is required.
INDU 6341 Advanced Concepts in Quality Improvement (*) (4 credits) The foundations of modern quality improvement, scientific basis of quality engineering, statistical experimental design issues such as randomized blocks, factorial designs at two levels, fractional factorial designs at two levels, applications on factorial designs, building models, and explanation and critique of Taguchi’s contributions. A project on selected topics is required.
Note: Students who have taken MECH 6461 may not receive credit for this course.
INDU 6351 System Reliability (4 credits)
Review of probability theory; definition of various measures (reliability, availability, MTTF, etc.) and related probability distributions; reliability evaluation of redundant systems (series, parallel, series-parallel, bridge network, etc.); two and three parameter Weibull analysis; failure data analysis; trend analysis; goodness of fit test (Kolmogorov/Smirnov test); introduction of stress-strength modelling; homogeneous Markov models; reliability evaluation of cold, warm, and hot standby systems; introduction to reliability testing; case studies. Knowledge of a first course in probability theory is assumed. Project: two hours per week.
Note: Students who have taken ENGR 6451 may not receive credit for this course.
INDU 6361 Discrete Optimization (4 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the instructor.
Topics include mathematical modelling of industrial and service systems by integer programming (IP); choices in model formulations; optimality, relaxations and bounds; well-solved problems in IP; computational complexity; branch-and-bound methods; polyhedral theory and cutting plane algorithms; Lagrangean duality; software for solving IPs; other optimization techniques. A project is required.
INDU 6371 Stochastic Optimization (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INDU 6111.
Topics include an overview of stochastic optimization models; two-stage and multi-stage stochastic programming; algorithms for solving large-scale stochastic programming models, including sample average approximation (SAA), L-shaped method and scenario decomposition algorithms; robust optimization approach. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for the course INDU 691X (Stochastic Optimization) may not take this course for credit.
INDU 6381 Applications of Reliability Engineering (4 credits)
Topics include an introduction to reliability function; reliability program; failure; requirement allocation and design optimization; painless risk management; design optimization by test; validation; durability; stressstrength; nuisances and no fault found (NFF); operating with failure; fail-safe and operating with failure; real-time health monitoring. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken INDU 691 (Application of Reliability Engineering) may not receive credit for this course.
INDU 6391 Reliability and Maintenance for Design and Manufacturing (4 credits)
Topics include fundamentals of product design and system validation methodologies to establish maintenance programs; design of experiment, test for design validation, pass/fail analysis, reliability growth models, reliability centred maintenance, test for manufacturing; accelerated life and stress tests; failure reporting, analysis and corrective action systems (FRACAS), maintenance programs, lifecycle analysis, end-of-life analysis and industrial approach for reliability; concepts and topics will be covered through real-life case studies. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken INDU 691 (Reliability and Maintenance for Design and Manufacturing) may not receive credit for this course.
INDU 6411 Human Factors Engineering (*) (4 credits)
Elements of anatomy, physiology and psychology; auditory and visual display engineering; engineering anthropometry; human capabilities and limitations; manual material handling: design of work places, human-machine system design; shift work and jet lag; acquisition and retention of skill; toxicity and hazard; human reliability. A project on a current topic is required.
Note: Students who have taken MECH 6251 may not receive credit for this course.
INDU 6421 Systems Safety Engineering and Management (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INDU 6310.
This course covers a variety of topics in safety engineering that provide the necessary knowledge and skills in order for engineers to design and manage systems where life-critical components will perform as expected, even when sub-components fail. Design concepts for safe operation with failure, design for human error and design for availability are introduced. Generic and safety dedicated engineering techniques are taught. Common safety management architectures for service and manufacturing systems, existing safety standards, guidelines in different industries, and their impact on the design processes across the life cycle of a product from initial concept to continuous certification are included. A project is required.
INDU 6521 Quantitative Methods in Healthcare Systems (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: INDU 6121.
Topics include mathematical modeling and optimization methods in healthcare problems, healthcare staff planning and scheduling, operating room management, and appointment scheduling in clinics. Other operational issues such as production and delivery of radio-pharmaceuticals, resource allocation and capacity planning in hospitals, ambulance redeployment and dispatching are discussed. Finally, system-level healthcare planning and management tools and methods such as routing and scheduling of caregivers in home-health industries, healthcare facility location, inventory management of blood products, kidney exchange optimization and optimization in radiation therapy (intensity-modulated radiation - IMRT and volumetric modulated arc therapy - VMAT) are introduced. A project is required.
INDU 6611 Applied Industrial Systems Analytics (4 credits)
Prerequisites: INDU 6121,6310.
The course covers Analytics as it is divided into three categories according to functional classification of analytics methods: descriptive, predictive, and prescriptive. By taking  a hands-on teaching approach, graduate students are taught a set of techniques of descriptive and predictive analytics, which emphasizes extensive analysis of real (or realistic) data sets from a variety of organizations such as manufacturing, service and healthcare using statistical packages. Students are also taught techniques for proper visualization and presentation of the results of their analysis. Specific analytics methods such as logistic regression, time series, decision trees, support vector machines, k-nearest neighbors, k-means are covered. A project is required.
INDU 6990 Industrial Engineering Capstone (9 credits)
Prerequisite: A minimum of 16 credits must be completed in the program.
A supervised design, simulation or experimental capstone design project in the students’ area of specialization. Students may work in groups to undertake:
A project with a company, governmental organization, or a NGO, supervised jointly by a faculty member and a member of the partner organization;
An engineering design that has potential to be commercialized, where a faculty member or District 3 representative supervises the project.
Students may also opt to tackle a research problem under the supervision of a faculty member.
A written report and a public presentation is required. Final report must include a detailed description of the industry experience or the research problem and clearly outline the engineering analysis. This is a two-term course (Fall and Winter only).
Note: Students cannot take this course for credit towards MASc or PhD degrees.
INDU 6991 Engineering Management Industrial Stage I (8 Credits)
Prerequisite: A minimum of 16 credits must be completed in the program.
The Industrial Stage I is designed to provide students with the opportunity to complete an engineering management project in a company, governmental organization, or a NGO under the supervision of an organization partner and a faculty member. Students are required to provide a written report and give a seminar.
Note: Students cannot take this course for credit towards MASc or PhD degrees.
INDU 6992 Engineering Management Industrial Stage II (8 Credits)
Prerequisite: INDU 6991.
The Industrial Stage II is designed to provide students with the additional opportunity to complete the second engineering management project in a company, governmental organization, or a NGO under the supervision of an organization partner and a faculty member. Students are required to provide a written report and give a seminar.
Note: Students cannot take this course for credit towards MASc or PhD degrees.
MECH 6011 Analysis and Design of Pneumatic Systems (4 credits)
Principles and operating characteristics of fluidic elements; modelling of wall attachment; beam deflection; turbulent and vortex amplifiers; design and analysis of microdiaphram and diaphram ejector amplifiers; methods of evaluation performance characteristics of fluid devices; passive fluidic elements; digital and analog fluidic circuit theories and their applications; case studies of fluidic systems. A project on selected topics is required.
MECH 6021 Design of Industrial Control Systems (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6101 or equivalent.
Analog and digital control system design. Analog controller design methods: lead and lag compensators, pole placement, model matching, two-parameter configuration, plant input/output feedback configuration. Introduction to state-space control system. State estimator and state feedback. Introduction to digital control system. Z-transform. Difference equations. Stability in the Z-domain. Digital implementation of analog controllers. Equivalent digital plant method. Alias signals. Selection of sampling time. PID controller. A project on specific topic or applications is required.
MECH 6041 Virtual Systems Engineering (4 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of the instructor.
Theory and application of virtual systems with an emphasis on virtual prototyping of mechanical systems. Virtual system modelling: particle systems, rigid body systems, lumped parameter models, and multi-domain system modelling. Non-real-time simulation methods: numerical integration methods, stiff systems and implicit methods. Hardware-in-the-loop simulation (HIL): Real-time simulation, multi-rate simulation and scheduling. Stability, invariance, and robustness. Virtual environments. Distributed simulation and time delay analysis. Design and analysis of virtual engineering systems: specification, design, verification, validation and prototype testing. A project is required.
MECH 6051 Process Dynamics and Control (*) (4 credits)
Dynamics of mechanical and chemical processes: linear and nonlinear system capacity, resistance, piping complexes; characteristics and dynamics of control valves; process time constants; proportional, reset and derivative control actions; feed forward and cascade control, direct digital control case studies on design of level control; p-4 control and heat exchanger control; analysis of industrial hazards and security. A project on selected topics of current interest is required.
MECH 6061 Analysis and Design of Hydraulic Control Systems (*) (4 credits)
Introduction to fluid power control technology; fundamentals of fluid transmission media; basic hydraulic control system components and circuits; hydraulic servosystems; modelling and dynamic analysis of hydraulic systems – design examples; basic pneumatic control system components and circuits – design examples. A projects on selected topics is required.
MECH 6081 Fuel Control Systems for Combustion Engines (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6201.
Introduction to fuel control systems for combustion engines with fuel injection. Dynamics of fuel injection for steady-state and transient process; injection characteristics for different combustion patterns; speed and power control in relation to engine characteristics; design principles of fuel systems; special requirements for starting, shut-down, schedule modulation; testing methods; wear and reliability problems. Case studies include: multicylinder in-line injection pump, rotary distributor injection pump, mecano-pneumatic fuel control unit. Full term project work on alternative fuel delivery systems and emissions control for combustion engines. Modelling and simulation. Demonstration of alternative fuel injection system on diesel engine in lab.
MECH 6091 Flight Control Systems (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6101 or equivalent.
Basics of flight dynamics modelling: axes systems and notation; equations of motion; aerodynamic forces and moments, airplane stability, aircraft on the ground; simulator flight model design. Flight instruments: classification; principles of operation, cockpit displays. Flight controls basics: configuration; control forces; primary and secondary controls. Introduction to automatic flight control: stability augmentation; autopilots; flight guidance and flight management systems; design examples. Flight simulation: classification; standards and regulations; system configuration and components. Projects on selected topics are required.
MECH 6101 Kinetic Theory of Gases (4 credits)
Equations of state for gases; molecular explanation of equations of state; introduction to quantum mechanics; the molecular theory of thermal energy and heat capacity; molecular velocity distribution, molecular collisions and the transport properties of gases, introduction to chemical kinetics. A project on specific topic or applications is required.
MECH 6111 Gas Dynamics (*) (4 credits)
Combined effects in one-dimensional flow; multidimensional flow; method of characteristics; one-dimensional treatment of non-steady gas dynamics; shock wave interactions; instability phenomena of supersonic intake diffusers; shock-boundary layer interactions. Projects on unsteady gas dynamics and on shock wave propagation and interactions are required.
MECH 6121 Aerodynamics (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6201.
Flow conservation equations, incompressible Navier-Stokes equations, inviscid irrotational and rotational flows: the Euler equations, the potential and stream function equations. Kelvin, Stokes and Helmholtz theorems. Elementary flows and their superposition, panel method for non-lifting bodies. Airfoil and wing characteristics, aerodynamics forces and moments coefficients. Flow around thin airfoils, Biot-Savart law, vortex sheets. Flow around thick airfoils, the panel method for lifting bodies. Flow around wings, Prandtl’s lifting line theory, induced angle and downwash, unswept wings, swept compressibility correction rules, the area rule. Transonic flow: small disturbance equation, full potential equation, supercritical airfoils. A project on specific topic or applications is required.
MECH 6131 Conduction and Radiation Heat Transfer (4 credits)
Solutions by analytical, numerical, and analogue methods of steady and transient temperature fields with and without heat sources; introduction to convection. Basic concepts and relations of radiation heat transfer, radiation of strongly absorbing media, and radiation of weakly absorbing media. A project on selected topics is required.
MECH 6141 Heat Exchanger Design (4 credits)
Review of heat transfer and flow losses; design consideration of heat exchangers; double pipe exchanger; shell and tube exchanger; extended surfaces; condenser, evaporator, regenerator, cooling tower. A project on selected topics is required.
MECH 6161 Gas Turbine Design (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: MECH 6171.
Study of practical criteria which influence the design of a gas turbine engine including relevant mechanical and aerodynamic constraints. The aerodynamics of each of the three major components of a modern turbo-fan engine, namely the compressor, the combustor and the turbine is considered. Air system acoustics, engine aerodynamic matching of components and modern performance testing methods. A design project is assigned for each of these components. A project on specific topic or applications is required.
MECH 6171 Turbomachinery and Propulsion (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6201.
Review of the gas turbine engine cycle and components arrangement. Types of turbo-propulsion for aircraft: turboprop, turbofan and turbojet. Energy transfer in incompressible and compressible turbomachines: the Euler equation, velocity triangles. Axial-flow compressors; mean-line analysis. Mechanisms of losses in turbomachines. Three-dimensional motion in turbomachines; the radial equilibrium equation and its numerical solution by finite difference methods. Dimensional analysis of incompressible and compressible flow in turbomachines, compressor and turbine performance maps; surge and stall. Centrifugal compressors. Axial-flow turbines. Prediction of performance of gas turbines, components matching. Projects on selected topics are required.
MECH 6181 Heating, Air Conditioning and Ventilation (*) (4 credits)
The effect of air temperature, humidity and purity on physiological comfort; overall heat transmission coefficients of building sections, air infiltration, ventilation and solar radiation loads; heating and air conditioning load calculations; heating, air conditioning and ventilating systems, equipment and controls; design of hot water piping and air distribution systems, pressure drop calculations; selection and specifications of mechanical equipment for heating, ventilation and air conditioning applications. A project on selected applications is required.
MECH 6191 Combustion (4 credits)
Prerequisite: MECH 6111.
Chemical thermodynamics; review of chemical kinetics; conservation equations for multicomponent reacting systems; detonation and deflagration of premixed materials; premixed laminar flames; gaseous diffusion flames, droplet combustion; turbulent flames; two-phase reacting systems; chemically reacting boundary layers. Projects on selected topics are required.
MECH 6231 Helicopter Flight Dynamics (4 credits)
Prerequisites: ENGR 6311 and MECH 6121, previously or concurrently.
Fundamental aspects of helicopter technology; rotary wing aerodynamics; aeromechanical stability; hover and forward flight performance; ground and air resonance; introduction to vibration and structural dynamic problems in helicopter; case studies in the rotorcraft field. Case studies and projects on selected topics are required.
MECH 6241 Operational Performance of Aircraft (4 credits)
Prerequisite: MECH 6121.
Introduction to fixed-wing aircraft operation. Flying environment and its measurement by aircraft instrumentation. Computation of lift and drag, effects of viscosity and compressibility. Review of piston, turboprop, turbojet and turbofan powerplants. Operational performance of aircraft in climb, cruise, descent and on ground. Advanced aircraft systems. Operational considerations in aircraft design. Projects on selected topics are required.
MECH 6251 Space Flight Mechanics and Propulsion Systems (4 credits)
Prerequisite: MECH 6111 or permission of the instructor.
Classification of space propulsion systems; Tsiolkovskij’s equation; ideal rocket and nozzle design; flight performance; basic orbital mechanics; chemical propellant rocket performance analysis; fundamentals of liquid and solid propellant rocket motors; electric, solar, fusion thruster. A project is required.
Note: Students who have taken MECH 7221 may not receive credit for this course.
MECH 6301 Vibration Problems in Rotating Machinery (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6311.
Torsional vibrations critical speeds, rotors driven by reciprocating machines, finite element modelling, whirling of shafts, gyroscopic effects, rotors on fluid film bearings, instability in torsional and bending vibrations, balancing, response to support excitations, condition monitoring. Projects on selected applications are required.
MECH 6311 Noise and Vibration Control (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6311.
Introduction to noise and vibration, measurement units. Review of wave theory, noise control criteria and standards, sources and nature of mechanical equipment noise, devices for noise control such as silencers, baffles and acoustic enclosures. Machinery vibration sources, radiation of noise from vibrating structures, devices and methods for vibration control such as isolators, dampers, absorbers and in-situ balancing. Active control of noise and vibration. Projects on selected applications are required.
MECH 6321 Optimum Design of Mechanical Systems (4 credits)
Survey of practical methods for optimum design of mechanical systems; optimal performance criteria and selection of design variables. Introduction to analytical and numerical optimization methods for single- and multi-variable unconstrained problems: direct search and gradient methods. Constrained optimization. Optimality criterion techniques for mechanical systems. Case studies in the area of machine tools, structural systems, machine element design, vehicle design, and hydraulic control systems. Discussion on commercial software packages, their capability, availability and limitations. An optimization project on selected topics is required.
MECH 6341 Engineering Analysis of Smart Materials and Structures (4 credits)
Topics include introduction to smart materials and structures; overview of mathematical models for mechanical and electrical systems; mathematical representation of smart systems; piezoelectric materials and their constitutive equations; electromechanical coupling in piezoelectric based systems and structures and their governing equations; shape memory alloys and their constitutive models; electrical activation of shape memory alloys and their dynamic modelling; electrorheological (ER) and magnetorheological (MR) fluids and elastomers; constitutive models for ER and MR fluids and elastomers; dynamic modelling and vibration analysis of ER and MR based adaptive devices and structures; application of smart materials as energy dissipating elements in structural systems for passive, semi-active and active vibration control; application of smart materials in motion control. A project is required.
MECH 6351 Modal Analysis of Mechanical Systems (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6311.
Natural frequencies and normal modes of multi-degree-of-freedom systems; orthogonality of normal modes; eigenvalue and eigenvector extraction methods; vibration response using normal mode analysis; complex natural frequencies and complex modes in damped systems, modal damping random response considerations; nonsymmetric systems using biorthogonality relations; modal parameter identification from tests, application of modal analysis to mechanical systems. Projects on selected applications are required.
MECH 6361 Mechanics of Biological Tissues (4 credits)
The course deals with mechanical behaviour of tissues in human body such as bone, cartilage, ligaments, tendons, blood vessels, muscles, skin, teeth, nerves. Classification of biological tissues; mechanical properties in vivo and in vitro testing; constitutive relationships, viscoelastic behaviour and rate/time dependency; remodelling and adaption due to mechanical loading; analogous mechanical systems. A project on current topic is required.
MECH 6421 Metal Machining and Surface Technology (4 credits)
Theoretical and practical aspects of mechanics and dynamics of metal machining; tool geometry in machine and working reference systems with their transformation matrices; machinability; wear; cutting forces; temperature distribution; tool material unconventional machining; machining economics; optimizing techniques for cutting conditions; surface mechanics and application of random processes. A project on selected topics is required.
MECH 6431 Introduction to Tribology (Wear, Friction and Lubrication) (4 credits)
Contact between stationary surfaces; dry friction; rolling contract; wear; boundary lubrication; lubricating oils and greases; hydrodynamic journal bearings; case studies in Tribology as applied to design and manufacturing problems. A project on specific topic or applications is required.
MECH 6441 Stress Analysis in Mechanical Design (4 credits)
Stress analysis for design of elastic and visco-elastic mechanical components subject to thermal, fatigue, vibrational and chemical environments; buckling and creep; cumulative damage. Case studies, and project from selected applications are required.
MECH 6451 Computer-Aided Mechanical Design (4 credits)
Concept of value and decision theory in design; design application and case studies in the implementation of digital computer-oriented design of engineering systems. Examples include design of specific machine elements, design of vehicle suspension, hydraulic positioning systems, ship propulsion system, multi-speed gear box, and cam drives. Introduction to identification, optimization, and parameter sensitivity. Implementation of these methods uses remote terminals and graphic display units. A project is required.
MECH 6471 Aircraft Structures (4 credits)
Prerequisite: MECH 6441 or equivalent.
Aero/performance aspects of aircraft structures; Airworthiness and design considerations; Materials; Static, vibratory and aeroelastic loadings; Propulsion-induced loadings; Functions and fabrication of structural components; Stress analysis of wings, fuselages, stringers, fuselage frames, wing ribs, cut-outs in wings and fuselages, and laminated structures; Buckling of aircraft structures: local buckling, instability of stiffened panels; flexural-torsional buckling; Fracture and fatigue failures. Case studies.
MECH 6481 Aeroelasticity (*) (4 credits)
Aerodynamic loading of elastic airfoils; phenomenon of divergence; effect of flexible control surface on divergence of main structure; divergence of one- and two-dimensional wing models; phenomenon of flutter; flutter of two- and three-dimensional wings; approximate analysis techniques; flutter prevention and control; panel flutter in high speed vehicles; flutter of turbomachine bladings; vortex induced oscillations; bridge buffeting. A project on specific applications is required.
MECH 6491 Engineering Metrology and Measurement Systems (4 credits)
Introduction to metrology, linear and geometric tolerancing, non-optical and optical methods in form measurement, fundamentals of optical metrology, interferometry - theory and overview, Moiré and phase shifting interfereometry, speckle interferometry and holography, light sources, detectors and imaging systems. Applications to precision measurement, Doppler vibrometry and dynamic characterization, applications to MEMS (Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems), and special topics include: nanometrology, X-ray interferometry and interference spectroscopy. A project is required.
MECH 6501 Advanced Materials (4 credits)
Advanced composites. Polymer matrix composites. Resins and fibers. Metal matrix composites. Ceramic matrix composites. Interfaces. Mechanical properties. Applications. A project on selected topics of current interest is required.
MECH 6511 Mechanical Forming of Metals (*) (4 credits)
Mechanisms of plastic deformation at ambient and elevated temperatures; plasticity theory; mechanical forming processes; forging; rolling; extrusion; wire drawing; deep drawing; bending; results of processing; mechanical properties; residual stresses; fibrous textures and preferred orientations; effects of annealing. Process modelling by shearline or finite element analysis. A project on current research topics and selected applications is required.
MECH 6521 Manufacturing of Composites (*) (4 credits)
Hand lay-up. Autoclave curing. Compression molding. Filament winding. Resin transfer molding. Braiding. Injection molding. Cutting. Joining. Thermoset and thermoplastic composites. Process modelling and computer simulation. Nondestructive evaluation techniques. A project on selected topics of current interest is required.
MECH 6531 Casting (4 credits)
Phase equilibrium diagrams; mechanisms of solidification; design of castings for various moulding processes, section sizes, dimensional accuracies and surface finishes; continuous casting; control of grain size; segregation and porosity. Defects in castings. A project on current research topic and selected applications is required.
MECH 6541 Joining Processes and Nondestructive Testing (4 credits)
Principles of joining; fusion welding; arc, torch, plasma, electron beam, resistance, etc; solid state welding; heterogeneous hot joining (brazing, soldering); heterogeneous cold joining; metallurgy of joints; joint properties; nondestructive testing processes; radiography, ultrasonic, magnetic particle, die penetrant, etc. A project on current research topic or selected applications is required.
MECH 6551 Fracture (4 credits)
Fracture mechanisms; ductile and cleavage; brittle fracture; notch effects; propagation of cracks; ductile-brittle transition; inter-granular fracture; hydrogen embrittlement; fatigue initiation mechanisms; crack propagation; preventive design; creep failure, mechanisms maps, fatigue; pore formation; grain boundary sliding; high temperature alloys, testing techniques; fractography. A project on current research topics and selected applications is required.
MECH 6561 High Strength Materials (4 credits)
Studies of the microstructures responsible for high strength and of the thermomechanical treatments producing these microstructures; dislocation theory; strain hardening; strengthening by solid-solution, massive hard phases, precipitation, dispersed particles, and martensitic and bainitic structures; fibre and particulate composites; surface treatments; residual stresses of thermal or mechanical origin. A project on current research topics and selected applications is required.
MECH 6571 Corrosion and Oxidation of Metals (4 credits)
Electrochemical corrosion and preventative measures. Stress corrosion, corrosion fatigue. Oxidation at low and high temperatures and protective measures. Selection of alloys and coatings. A project on current research topic or selected applications is required.
MECH 6581 Mechanical Behaviour of Polymer Composite Materials (*) (4 credits)
General applications of polymer composite materials in the aircraft, aerospace, automobile, marine, recreational and chemical processing industries. Different fibres and resins. Mechanics of a unidirectional lamina. Transformation of stress, strain, modulus and compliance. Off-axis engineering constants, shear and normal coupling coefficients. In-plane and flexural stiffness and compliance of different laminates including cross-ply, angle-ply, quasi-isotropic and general bidirectional laminates. Strength of laminates and failure criteria. Micro-mechanics. Projects on selected applications are required.
MECH 6601 Testing and Evaluation of Polymer Composite Materials and Structures (4 credits)
Theory and practice for the determination of tensile, compression and shear properties of composite materials; techniques for the determination of physical and chemical properties; non-destructive techniques such as ultrasonics, acousto-ultrasonics, acoustic emission, infrared and lasers for evaluation of composite structures. A project on selected topics of current interest is required.
MECH 6611 Numerically Controlled Machines (4 credits)
Prerequisite: MECH 6451 or equivalent.
Positioning and contouring NC machines, typical NC applications; analysis of typical NC systems and design considerations; components. A design project on multi-surface machine parts is required.
MECH 6621 Microprocessors and Applications (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: A course in industrial electronics or permission of the instructor.
Introduction to the concepts and practices of using microprocessors and micro-computers in such applications as instrumentation, manufacturing, control and automation; architecture and programming techniques; interface logic circuits; I/O systems; case studies of mechanical engineering applications. A project on specific topic or applications is required.
MECH 6631 Industrial Automation (4 credits)
Introduction to mechanization of industrial processes such as machining, material handling, assembling, and quality control; selection of actuators and sensors for mechanization; design of sequential control circuits using classical methods, ladder diagram, travel-step diagram and cascade method; specifying control sequences using GRAFCET and FUP; special purpose circuits such as emergency circuits, timers, and programmable logic controllers (PLCs); case studies dealing with typical industrial manufacturing processes and computer simulation. A project on specific topic or applications is required.
MECH 6641 Engineering Fracture Mechanics and Fatigue (4 credits)
Fracture mechanics and fatigue of machine elements and structures; Linear Elastic Fracture Mechanics (LEFM); Elastic Plastic Fracture Mechanics (EPFM); Finite Element Analysis for fracture; LEFM and EPFM Testing; Fracture mechanics approach to fatigue crack growth problem; Constant-amplitude, variable-amplitude and stochastic loading cases; Industrial applications to mechanical design and fracture and fatigue control in machine elements and structures; Damage tolerance design. A case study or project on selected applications is required.
MECH 6651 Structural Composites (4 credits)
Analysis for design of beams, columns, rods, plates, sandwich panels and shells made of composites; anisotropic elasticity; energy methods; vibration and buckling; local buckling in sandwich structures; free edge effects and delamination; joining; and failure considerations in design. A project on selected applications is required.
MECH 6661 Thermodynamics and Phase Equilibria of Materials (4 credits)
Thermodynamic laws and relationships. Partial and relative state functions: Activities in multicomponent systems, reference and standard states, solution thermodynamics. Thermodynamics of phase transformations and chemical reactions in engineering materials. Calculation of thermodynamic functions and properties. Experimental methods of determining thermodynamic properties. Multicomponent and multiphasic systems. Generalized phase rules, phase diagrams, stability diagrams and other diagram types. Computational thermodynamics for developing engineering materials. A project is required.
MECH 6671 Finite Element Method in Machine Design (4 credits)
Prerequisite: MECH 6441.
Role of Finite element method in machine design. Variational principles. Formulation of the finite element problem in stress, vibration and buckling analyses of machine components. Different elements and interpolation functions. Application in machine design; fracture. A case study or project on selected applications is required.
MECH 6681 Dynamics and Control of Nonholonomic Systems (4 credits)
Kinematics of nonholonomic systems; dynamics of nonholonomic systems, including d’Álembert principle, Euler-Lagrange equations; equations of motion of nonholonomic systems with Lagrangian multipliers; the reaction of ideal nonholonomic constraints; nonholonomic Caplygin systems; Bifurcation and stability analysis of the nonholonomic systems. Analysis and design of nonlinear control of nonholonomic systems, including kinematic control and dynamic control as well as force control. Controller designs with uncertain nonholonomic systems. Application examples including control of wheeled mobile robots and walking robots. A project is required.
MECH 6691 Optical Microsystems (4 credits)
Microfabrication and micromachining required for optical microsystems; optical microsystem modelling, simulation, sensitivity analysis. Properties of materials suitable for optical MEMS (Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems). Measurements, sensing and actuation suitable for optical microsystems. Introduction to micro-optical components; optical waveguide-based systems. Design of different optical MEMS devices. Chemical and biochemical sensing with optical microsystems. Assembly, packaging and testing of optical MEMS devices. A project is required.
MECH 6741 Mechatronics (*) (4 credits)
Introduction to mechatronics; basic elements of mechatronic systems. Measurement systems: including principles of measurement systems; sensors and transducers; signal conditioning processes and circuits; filters and data acquisition. Actuation systems: mechanical actuation systems and electrical actuation systems. Controllers: control modes; PID controller; performance measures; introduction to digital controllers and robust control. Modelling and analysis of mechatronic systems; performance measures; frequency response; transient response analysis; stability analysis. A project is required.
MECH 6751 Vehicle Dynamics (*) (4 credits)
Tire-terrain interactions; side-slip; cornering and aligning properties of tires: camber angle and camber torque; estimation of braking-tractive and cornering forces of tires; steady-state handling of road vehicles: steering response and directional stability; handling and directional response of vehicles with multiple steerable axles: handling of articulated vehicles: handling and directional response of tracked and wheeled off-road vehicles; directional response to simultaneous braking and steering. A project on research topics is required.
MECH 6761 Vehicular Internal Combustion Engines (*) (4 credits)
Mechanical design of vehicular engines; gas exchange and combustion engine processes; combustion chambers design; fuels and fuel supply; ignition and control systems; cooling and lubrication of engines; emissions formation and control; engine operational characteristics - matching with vehicles; enhancement of engine performance; engine testing; environmental impact of vehicular engines; recent developments in energy-efficient and “clean” engines. Design of calculation project of vehicular engine. Project work on alternative fuel delivering systems and emissions control for combusion engines. Modelling and simulation. Demonstration of alternative fuel injection system on diesel engine in lab.
MECH 6771 Driverless Ground Vehicles (*) (4 credits)
Definition and classifications; case studies of major industrial and research vehicle prototypes; applications; kinematic modelling for feedback control of a driverless vehicle as a planar rigid body; vehicle motion and its relation to steering and drive rates of its wheels; co-ordinate systems assignment; transformation matrices; condition for rolling without skidding and sliding; sensor models and sensor integrations; dead-reckoning control; global and local path planning; introduction to dynamic modelling of driverless vehicle with and without the dynamics of wheel assemblies; design of optimal controllers; introduction to adaptive neuro-morphic controller. Projects are an integral part of the course for which the following may be used: TUTSIM, FORTRAM, or C. A project on selected topics is required.
MECH 6781 Guided Vehicle Systems (*) (4 credits)
Definition and classification of guided transportation systems; track characterization: alignment, gage, profile and cross-level irregularities; wheel-rail interactions: rolling contact theories, creep forces; modelling of guided vehicle components; wheelset, suspension, truck and car body configurations, suspension characteristics; performance evaluation: stability/hunting, ride quality; introduction to advanced guided vehicles. A project on selected topics is an integral part of the course.
MECH 6791 Aircraft Hydro-Mechanical and Fuel Systems (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6201.
This course focuses on design principles and sizing of the following aircraft systems: hydraulic system, primary and secondary flight control actuation systems, landing gear systems, and fuel system. Traditional and new technology implementations in aircraft, helicopters and other aerospace vehicles are considered. Associated standards and regulations are described. Principles of architecture development and integration, as well as engineering tools for system sizing and simulation are covered. A project is required.
MECH 6891 Aircraft Pneumatic and Electrical Power Systems (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6201.
This course focuses on design principles and sizing of the following aircraft systems: electrical power system, auxiliary and emergency power systems, environmental control system, ice and rain protection system, and pneumatic power system. Traditional and new technology implementations in aircraft, helicopters and other aerospace vehicles are considered. Associated standards and regulations are described. Principles of architecture development and integration, as well as engineering tools for system sizing and simulation are covered. A project is required, including a laboratory component.
MECH 691 Topics in Mechanical Engineering I (4 credits)
See Note in Topic Area E02
MECH 6941 Concurrent Engineering in Aerospace Systems (4 credits)
Introduction: objectives, definitions, impact on product development; process modelling and optimization; forming of engineering team; selection of techniques, methodology and tools; market design focus vs. quality design focus; development time management; process integration; aerospace case studies/projects, future trends.
MECH 6961 Aerospace Case Study I
See Mechanical & Industrial Engineering section.
MECH 6971 Aerospace Case Study II
See Mechanical & Industrial Engineering section.
Note: MECH 6961 and MECH 6971 are restricted to students registered in aerospace engineering programs at Concordia or participating universities. These courses cover topical case studies drawn from aerospace industrial experience. They are conducted in a modular form by experienced engineers who specialize in one or more facets of this industry. They are given in collaboration with the other participating universities and may be conducted at any of the Montreal universities in the language of convenience to the instructor.
MECH 7011 Dynamics of Hydraulic Control Systems (4 credits)
Prerequisites: MECH 6021, 6061.
Review of hydraulic control system technology and the need for dynamic analyses. Conventional techniques for assuring good response by analysis. Power flow modelling, power bond graphs, and digital simulation techniques. Obtaining dynamic relationships and coefficients. Phenomena which can affect dynamic response. Projects on selected topics are required.
MECH 7101 Convection Heat Transfer (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ENGR 6201.
Heat transfer in laminar flow, review of the differential and integral forms of the general energy equation for boundary layer regimes; solution of the energy equation for free convection, forced convection and heat transfer in entrance regions. Heat transfer in turbulent flow; review of the energy equation for turbulent flow; momentum-heat transfer analogies; experimental results for forced convection, free convection, and combined free and forced convection. Project or term paper required.
MECH 7501 Design Using Composite Materials (4 credits)
Prerequisite: MECH 6581.
General concept involving design using composite materials. Integral approach to design. Selection of materials. Selection of fabrication techniques. Computer-aided design tools. Consideration for fracture, fatigue, buckling and impact. Joining consideration. Design of tubes, beams, columns. Design of aircraft components. A project on selected topics is required.
MECH 7511 Vehicle Vibration and Control (4 credits)
Dynamic modelling of ground vehicles for analysis of ride performance; ride comfort and safety criteria; modelling of human body; characterization of road inputs; modelling and design of vibration isolators: primary suspension, secondary suspension; active, semi-active and passive isolators; kinematic and dynamic analysis of suspension linkages; laboratory methods for performance evaluation of vehicle suspension systems; software packages and case studies. Projects on selected applications are required.
MECH 7711 Handling and Stability of Road Vehicles (4 credits)
Prerequisite: MECH 6751 or equivalent.
Mathematical methods in vehicle dynamics; tire and suspension modelling and design for handling; static roll; steady turning and off-tracking analysis of straight and articulated road vehicles; directional stability and braking analysis; directional response of articulated vehicles with steerable axles; software packages and case studies. Project on selected topics is an integral part of the course.
MECH 791 Topics in Mechanical Engineering II (4 credits)
See Note in Topic Area E02
MECH 8011 Doctoral Seminar in Mechanical Engineering (***)
Grading on a pass/fail basis only. No credit value.
COMP 6971 Project and Report (4 credits). The purpose of the project report is to provide students in the MApCompSc program with an opportunity to carry out independent project work and to present it in an acceptable form. The project may consist of the following:
A theoretical study of a computer science problem.
A design and/or development project conducted at Concordia.
A design and/or development project conducted as part of the student’s full-time employment, providing the student’s employer furnishes written approval for the pursuit and reporting of the project.
Before registration for a project course, students must obtain written consent of a faculty member who acts as advisor for the report. A form for this consent is available in the Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering.
A four-credit report is due on the last day of classes of the term (fall, winter, summer) in which students are registered. Students are expected to have a preliminary version of their report approved by their advisor before its final submission. On or before the submission deadline, students must submit three copies of the report to their advisor, who grades the report. One copy of the report is returned to the student, one retained by the advisor, and one by the Department.
The report, including an abstract, must be suitably documented and illustrated, should be at least 5000 words in length, must be typewritten on one side of 21.5 cm by 28 cm white paper of quality, and must be enclosed in binding. Students are referred to the latest edition of Form and Style: Thesis, Report, Term Papers by Campbell, Ballou and Slade, published by Houghton Mifflin (Academic).
Industrial Experience Option in the Master of Applied Computer Science
Applicants to the Master of Applied Computer Science may apply to the Industrial Experience option in the industrial milieu through the Institute for Co-operative Education. Students should indicate their choice on the application form. The Institute for Co-operative Education will help them with resumes, cover letters and interview techniques. The suggested schedule is as follows: fall and winter terms will be dedicated to course work followed by one term in industry, culminating with two terms in University for the remaining course work. The industrial experience term will be noted on the student transcript/record.
Students apply to the Industrial Experience option as early as possible, preferably when they enter the program. It is preferable to be bilingual in French and English if they wish to work in Quebec. Students who lack good language skills and still want to be part of the program should improve their language skills prior to final acceptance.
Admission Criteria
Students need to be enrolled in the Industrial Experience option at least the semester before going on a work term. They begin applying for jobs the semester prior to the work term. Previous work experience cannot be used toward credit for the ENCS 6931. Students should have good grades (greater than a CGPA of 3.40) for the master’s program, be full-time and have good communication skills. A Canadian work permit is required. The Departmental Co-op Program Director will recommend final acceptance to the Industrial Experience option.
ENCS 6931 Industrial Stage and Training (9 credits)
Prerequisite: Completion of at least twenty credits in the program and permission of the Departmental Co-op Program Director.
This is an integral component of the Industrial Experience option that is to be completed under the supervision of an experienced engineer/computer scientist in the facilities of a participating company (a Canadian work permit is required).
Each student receives an assessment from the Departmental Co-op Program Director in consultation with the industry supervisor and the faculty advisor. Grading is on a pass/fail basis based on a proposal, monthly progress reports, a final report and a presentation.
SOEN 6971 Project and Report (4 credits). The purpose of the project report is to provide students in the MEng (Software Engineering) program with an opportunity to carry out independent project work and to present it in an acceptable form. The project may consist of the following:
A theoretical study of a software engineering problem.
A design and/or development project conducted at Concordia.
A design and/or development project conducted as part of the student’s full-time employment, providing the student’s employer furnishes written approval for the pursuit and reporting of the project.
Before registration for a project course, students must obtain written consent of a faculty member who acts as advisor for the report. A form for this consent is available in the Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering.
A four-credit report is due on the last day of classes of the term (fall, winter, summer) in which students are registered. Students are expected to have a preliminary version of their report approved by their advisor before its final submission. On or before the submission deadline, students must submit three copies of the report to their advisor, who grades the report. One copy of the report is returned to the student, one retained by the advisor, and one by the Department.
The report, including an abstract, must be suitably documented and illustrated, should be at least 5000 words in length, must be typewritten on one side of 21.5 cm by 28 cm white paper of quality, and must be enclosed in binding. Students are referred to the latest edition of Form and Style: Thesis, Report, Term Papers by Campbell, Ballou and Slade, published by Houghton Mifflin (Academic).
COMP 5201 Computer Organization and Assembly Language (4 credits)
Programming in a subset of a suitably chosen assembly language; instruction-set level view of computers; translation of sample high-level language constructs to the instruction-set level. User-level view of the computer system through an operating system. Privileged modes of operation of the hardware for achieving goals such as protection and resource management; the hierarchy of the memory system as a resource, its concepts and requirements. Input/output including interrupt handling.
COMP 5261 Computer Architecture (3 credits)
Prerequisite: COMP 5461 previously or concurrently.
Computer architecture models: control-flow and data-flow. Concurrency and locality, data dependency theory. Instruction level parallelism. Instruction scheduling. Pipelined processors. Vector processors. Thread level parallelism. Multiprocessors. Shared memory models. Coherence protocols. Interconnection networks. Performance issues. Advanced topics in contemporary computer architectures. Case studies.
COMP 5361 Discrete Structures and Formal Languages (4 credits)
Discrete mathematics: sets, logic, quantifiers, relations, and functions. Regular languages: finite automata (deterministic and non-deterministic), regular expressions, regular grammars, pumping lemmas for regular languages, closure properties for regular languages. Context-free languages: context-free grammars, parsing and ambiguity, normal forms for grammars, pushdown automata, closure properties for context free languages.
COMP 5421 Advanced Programming (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COMP 5511.
Designing classes and programs. Program development. Encapsulation; dependency minimization. Inheritance hierarchies; abstract classes and interfaces; frameworks, Reading and writing files; serialization. Applications of inheritance and generics. Design and use of class libraries; user interface design; database and network programming.
COMP 5461 Operating Systems (4 credits)
Prerequisites: COMP 5201, 5511.
Basic concepts of operating systems and system programming. Processes, interprocess communication, and synchronization, memory allocation, segmentation, paging. Resource allocation, scheduling, performance evaluation. File systems, storage devices, I/O systems. Protection, security, and privacy. Advanced operating system concepts: distributed systems, multi-processor and parallel systems, real-time systems.
COMP 5481 Programming and Problem Solving (4 credits)
Prerequisites: MATH 204, 205 or equivalent.
Overview of programming and problem solving. Operators and expressions. Types, values, and variables; type conversion. Classes, objects, and methods. Assignment, conditional and repetitive statements. Arrays. Input and Output. Program structure and organization; encapsulation. Recursion and its uses. Designing classes and member functions; aggregation and inheritance. Introduction to libraries and their applications. Lectures: three hours per week. Tutorial: one hour per week. Lab: 3 hours per week.
COMP 5511 Principles of Data Structures (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COMP 5481 or equivalent training or experience in Java programming.
Definition, use, and application of fundamental data structures and associated algorithms. Asymptotic analysis of algorithms. Storage management: arrays, strings, lists and trees. Data abstraction: stacks, queues, priority queues, sets, and tables. Searching and sorting. Programming techniques: designing classes for data structures.
COMP 5531 Files and Databases (4 credits)
Prerequisites: COMP 5361, 5511.
Introduction to file management: basic file structures and access methods, sequential and indexed-sequential files, B+-trees and R-trees; external sorting; dynamic hashing; clustering techniques. Introduction to database management: fundamental data models - hierarchical, network, and relational; data dependencies; normal forms; and relational database design. Formal query languages: relational algebra, calculus; commercial languages: SQL, QBE. Fundamentals of data processing.
COMP 5541 Tools and Techniques for Software Engineering (4 credits)
Prerequisites: COMP 5361, COMP 5511, ENCS 6721; or permission of the Graduate Program Director.
The software life cycle. IEEE and MIL standards for software documentation. Formal methods. Software architectures. Software design and prototyping. Interfacing and encapsulation. Use of libraries, frameworks, and CASE tools. Implementation and maintenance. Verification and validation.
COMP 5611 Elementary Numerical Methods (3 credits)
Prerequisites: COMP 5361, 5511.
Error analysis and computer arithmetic. Numerical methods for solving linear systems, Gaussian elimination, LU decomposition. Numerical solution of non-linear equations, fixed point iterations, rate of convergence. Interpolations and approximations, Lagrange polynomials, divided differences, discrete least-square approximation, Legendre polynomials. Numerical integration, Newton-Cotes formulas, Romberg integration. Emphasis will be on the development of efficient algorithms.
COMP 6971 Project and Report (4 credits)
SOEN 6971 Project and Report (4 credits)
COMP 7941 Master’s Research and Thesis (29 credits)
ENCS 6931 Industrial Stage and Training (9 credits)
SOEN 7941 Master’s Research and Thesis (29 credits)
SOEN 6501 Programming Competency Test
M.Ap.Comp.Sc and M.Eng (SOEN) students must complete SOEN 6501 in their first term after the first registration as full-time (part-time) students in their program. This course is graded on a pass/fail basis and has no credit value. For purposes of registration, this work is designated as SOEN 6501.
C15 - DOCTORAL SEMINAR, RESEARCH, AND THESIS
ENCS 8011 PhD Seminar (2 credits)
ENCS 8511 Doctoral Research Proposal (6 credits)
COMP 8901 Doctoral Research and Thesis (70 credits)
SOEN 8901 Doctoral Research and Thesis (70 credits)
ENCS 8501 Comprehensive Examination
Doctoral students must begin work on ENCS 8501 within 12 (24) months after the first registration as full-time (part-time) students in a PhD program. This course is graded on a pass/fail basis and has no credit value. For purposes of registration, this work will be designated as ENCS 8501.
C16 - COGNATE DISCIPLINES
Students in a master’s program may take courses from Engineering Topic Areas E10, E42, E66, E68 and E70 for credit and also from the course list below, provided that prerequisite requirements are met:
COEN 7311 Protocol Design and Validation
ENCS 6021 Engineering Analysis
ENCS 6161 Probability and Stochastic Processes
ENCS 6181 Optimization Techniques I (*)
Course Descriptions
The following are one-term courses (four credits each) unless otherwise indicated. For additional information concerning course descriptions, prerequisites, and schedules contact the Office of the Associate Dean, Engineering and Computer Science.
Note: Some graduate courses are content equivalent with specific undergraduate courses. These graduate courses, indicated with (*) below, are not available for credit to students who have completed the undergraduate equivalent.
COMP 6231 Distributed System Design (4 credits)
Principles of distributed computing: scalability, transparency, concurrency, consistency, fault tolerance. Client-server interaction technologies: interprocess communication, sockets, group communication, remote procedure call, remote method invocation, object request broker, CORBA, web services. Distributed server design techniques: process replication, fault tolerance through passive replication, high availability through active replication, coordination and agreement transactions and concurrency control. Designing software fault-tolerant highly available distributed systems using process replication. Laboratory: two hours per week.
COMP 6281 Parallel Programming (*) (4 credits)
Migration from Von Neumann to parallel processing architectures: shared-memory and message-passing paradigms; massively parallel computers; recent trends in commodity parallel processing; clusters, multi-core, CPU-GPU based heterogeneous computing. Issues of memory consistency and load balancing. Parallel algorithms for shared-memory and message passing platforms; efficiency and scalability; issues of performance overhead. Parallel programming environments: parallel programming models; languages; software tools. Laboratory: two hours per week. A project is required.
COMP 6311 Animation for Computer Games (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COMP 6761 or equivalent, previously or concurrently.
Introduction to the algorithms, data structures, and techniques used in modelling and rendering dynamic scenes. Topics include principles of traditional animation, production pipeline, animation hardware and software, orientation representation and interpolation, modelling physical and articulated objects, forward and inverse kinematics, motion control and capture, key-frame, procedural, and behavioural animation, camera animation, scripting system, and free-form deformation. A project is required. Laboratory: two hours per week.
COMP 6321 Machine Learning (4 credits)
Introduction to the fundamentals of machine learning. Linear models: linear and polynomial regression, overfitting, model selection, logistic regression, naive Bayes. Non-linear models: decision trees, instance-based learning, boosting, neural networks. Support vector machines and kernels. Computational learning theory. Experimental methodology, sources of error. Structured models: graphical models, deep belief networks. Unsupervised learning: k-means, mixture models, density estimation, expectation maximization, principle component analysis, eigenmaps and other dimensionality reduction methods. Learning in dynamical systems: hidden Markov models and other types of temporal/sequence models. Reinforcement learning. Survey of machine learning and its applications. A project is required. Laboratory: two hours per week.
COMP 6331 Advanced Game Development (*) (4 credits)
Prerequisite: Permission of instructor.
Introduction to advanced aspects of computer games. Game engine design. Artificial Intelligence (AI): non‑player character movement, coordinated movement, pathfinding, world representations; decision making; tactical AI, strategic AI, learning in games. Physics‑based techniques: collision detection and response. Networked gaming: multi‑player games, networking and distributed game design, mobile gaming. Improving realism: cut scenes, 3D sound. A project is required. Laboratory: two hours per week.
COMP 6341 Computer Vision (*) (4 credits)
This course introduces basic techniques and concepts in computer vision including image formation, grouping and fitting, geometric vision, recognition, perceptual organization, and the state-of-the art software tools. Students learn fundamental algorithms and techniques, and gain experience in programming vision-based components; in particular, how to program in OpenCV, a powerful software interface used to process data captured from passive and active sensors. A project is required. Laboratory: two hours per week.
Note: Students who have received credit for COMP 691 (Computer Vision) may not take this course for credit.
COMP 6351 Topics in Scientific Computation (4 credits)
Selected elements of numerical methods that are central to scientific computation. The precise contents of the course may differ somewhat from one offering to the next, but will include the following topics: An introduction to the numerical solution of nonlinear equations, continuation methods, numerical solution of initial value problems in ordinary differential equations, finite difference method, numerical stability theory, stiff equations, boundary value problems in ordinary differential equations, collocation methods, introduction to the numerical solution of partial differential equations, with emphasis on nonlinear diffusion problems. A project is required.
COMP 6361 Numerical Analysis of Nonlinear Equations (4 credits)
An introduction to numerical algorithms for nonlinear equations, including discrete as well as continuous systems. The emphasis is on computer-aided numerical analysis rather than numerical simulation. This course is suitable for scientists and engineers with a practical interest in nonlinear phenomena. Topics include computational aspects of: homotopy and continuation methods, fixed points and stationary solutions, asymptotic stability, bifurcations, periodic solutions, transition to chaos, conservative systems, travelling wave solutions, discretization techniques. A variety of applications will be considered. Numerical software packages will be available. A project is required.
COMP 6381 Digital Geometric Modelling (4 credits)
This course introduces the digital geometry modelling pipeline focusing on fundamental data structures and algorithms for digital representation and processing of 3D geometry.  Students  study a wide range of applications and solutions in computer-aided design, engineering, architecture reverse engineering, and medical applications. As triangle meshes are by far the most popular representation for 3D geometry, this course focuses on triangle mesh representations and data structures that enable the programmer to efficiently query and edit geometry. In addition, the course covers spline modelling: Hermite splines, Bezier splines, and B-Splines. A project is required.
COMP 6411 Comparative Study of Programming Languages (4 credits) Comparison of several high-level programming languages with respect to application areas, design, efficiency, and ease of use. The selected languages will demonstrate programming paradigms such as functional, logical, and scripting. Static and dynamic typing. Compilation and interpretation. Advanced implementation techniques. A project is required.
COMP 6421 Compiler Design (*) (4 credits)
Compiler organization and implementation: lexical analysis and parsing, syntax-directed translation, code optimization. Run-time systems. A project is required.
COMP 6461 Computer Networks and Protocols (4 credits)
Direct link networks: encoding, framing, error detection, flow control, example networks. Packet switching and forwarding: bridges, switches. Internetworking: Internet Protocol, routing, addressing, IPv6, multicasting, mobile IP. End-to-end protocols: UDP, TCP. Network security concepts. Application-level protocols. Laboratory: two hours per week.
COMP 6521 Advanced Database Technology and Applications (4 credits)
Review of standard relational databases, query languages. Query processing and optimization. Parallel and distributed databases. Information integration. Data warehouse systems. Data mining and OLAP. Web databases and XML Active and logical databases, spatial and multimedia data management. Laboratory: Two hours per week.
COMP 6531 Foundations of the Semantic Web (4 credits)
Web markup languages, World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) standards, Extensible Markup Language (XML) Resource Description Framework (RDF), schema for markup languages, Semantic Web, ontology development, markup languages for ontologies, Web Ontology Language (OWL), logical foundations of ontologies, description logics, reasoning with ontologies. A project is required.
COMP 6591 Introduction to Knowledge-Base Systems (4 credits)
Review of first-order logic, relational algebra, and relational calculus. Fundamentals of logic programming. Logic for knowledge representation. Architecture of a knowledge-base system. Fundamentals of deductive databases. Top-down and bottom-up query processing. Some important query processing strategies and their comparison. Project or term paper on current research topics.
COMP 6621 Discrete Mathematics of Paul Erdös (4 credits)
Introduction to the methods and proof techniques of Paul Erdös that are particularly applicable to Computer Science. Proof of Bertrand’s postulate. The Erdös-Szekeres and the de Bruijn-Erdös theorems. Ramsey’s theorem and Ramsey numbers. Van der Waerden’s theorem and Van der Waerden numbers. Delta-systems and a proof of the Erdös-Lovász conjecture. The Erdös-Ko-Rado theorem. Extremal graph theory. Random graphs and graph colouring. The probabilistic method and its applications in theoretical Computer Science. A project is required.
COMP 6631 Large-Scale Optimization (4 credits)
Mathematical modelling of large-scale optimization models. Design and implementation of large-scale optimization techniques: decomposition methods (Benders, Dantzig-Wolfe, Lagrangian Relaxation, Column Generation), branch-and-price techniques. Large-scale linear and non-linear programming techniques for network optimization and integer/discrete programming. Techniques for nonlinear non-convex continuous optimization: branch-and-bound methods, DC (difference of convex functions) programming, bilinear and biconvex optimization. Heuristics and meta-heuristics. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a COMP 691Y number may not take this course for credit.
COMP 6641 Theory of Computation (4 credits)
General properties of algorithmic computations. Turing machines, universal Turing machines. Turing computable functions as a standard family of algorithms. Primitive recursive functions. Church’s thesis, recursive sets. Recursively enumerable sets and their properties. Rice’s theorem. Time and space complexity measures. Hierarchy of complexity measures. Advanced topics in complexity theory. A project is required.
COMP 6651 Algorithm Design Techniques (4 credits)
Mathematical preliminaries; Empirical and theoretical measures of algorithm efficiencies; Optimization and combinatorial techniques and algorithms including greedy algorithms, dynamic programming, branch-and-bound techniques and graph network algorithms; Amortized complexity analysis; String matching algorithms; NP-complete problems and approximate solutions; Probabilistic algorithms. A project is required.
COMP 6661 Combinatorial Algorithms (4 credits)
Representation and generation of combinatorial objects; search techniques; counting and estimation. Projects on selected applications from combinatorics and graph theory.
COMP 6711 Computational Geometry (4 credits)
Efficient algorithms and data structures to solve geometric problems. Problems discussed include convex hulls, line intersections, polygon triangulation, point location, range searching, Voronoi diagrams, Delaunay triangulations, interval trees and segment trees, arrangements, robot motion planning, binary space partitions, quadtrees, and visitility. Algorithmic methods include plane sweep, incremental insertion, randomization, divide and conquer. Emphasis will be given to computation and complexity, with applications in computer graphics, computer aided design, geographic information systems, networks, mesh generation, databases, and robot motion planning. A project is required.
COMP 6721 Applied Artificial Intelligence (*) (4 credits)
The course covers heuristic and adversarial searches for concrete applications. It then discusses automated reasoning, advanced knowledge representation and dealing with uncertainly for Artificial Intelligence applications. Finally, it introduces autoencoders, recurrent neural networks and sequence to sequence models. A project is required. Laboratory: two hours per week.
COMP 6731 Pattern Recognition (*) (4 credits)
Pre-processing. Feature extraction and selection. Similarity between patterns and distance measurements. Syntactic and statistical approaches. Clustering analysis. Bayesian decision theory and discriminant functions. Clustering and classification techniques. Applications. A project is required. Laboratory: two hours per week.
COMP 6741 Intelligent Systems (*) (4 credits)
Knowledge representation and reasoning. Uncertainty and conflict resolution. Design of intelligent systems. Grammar-based, rule-based, and blackboard architectures. A project is required. Laboratory: two hours per week.
COMP 6751 Natural Language Analysis (4 credits)
Introduction to natural language processing. Structure of English. Grammars and parsing. Lexical and compositional semantics. Pragmatic issues. Applications in text mining and information extraction. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for COMP 7741 before September 2011 may not take this course for credit.
COMP 6761 Advanced 3D Graphics for Game Programming (4 credits)
Fundamental algorithms, techniques, and software engineering principles for 3D graphics. Introduction to real-time graphics application architecture; review of basic 3D concepts of modelling, viewing, and rendering. 3D graphics functions, pipeline, and performance. Hierarchical 3D graphics. Algorithms for occlusion culling, collision detection, photorealism, shadows, and textures. Current trends and state-of-the-art graphics and physics algorithms. Laboratory: Two hours per week.
COMP 6771 Image Processing (*) (4 credits)
Digital image fundamentals; image enhancement: histogram processing, filtering in the spatial domain, filtering in the frequency domain; image restoration and reconstruction; image segmentation: line detection, Hough transform, edge detection and linking, thresholding, region splitting and merging; image compression; introduction to wavelet transform and multi-resolution processing. A project is required. Laboratory: two hours per week.
COMP 6781 Statistical Natural Language Processing (4 credits)
The course covers robust methods to natural language processing (NLP) and their applications to manipulate large text collections. Topics covered in this course include: Zipf’s law, information retrieval, statistical machine translation, N-gram language models and smoothing techniques, word sense disambiguation, part-of-speech tagging and probabilistic grammars and parsing. A project is required.
COMP 6791 Information Retrieval and Web Search (*) (4 credits)
Basics of information retrieval (IR): Boolean, vector space and probabilistic models. Tokenization and creation of inverted files. Weighting schemes. Evaluation of IR systems: precision, recall, E-measure. Relevance feedback and query expansion. Application of IR to Web search engines: XML, link analysis, PageRank algorithm. Text categorization and clustering techniques as used in spam filtering. A project is required. Laboratory: two hours per week.
COMP 6811 Bioinformatics Algorithms (4 credits)
The principal objectives of the course are to cover the major algorithms used in bioinformatics; sequence alignment, multiple sequence alignment, phylogeny; classifying patterns in sequences; secondary structure prediction; 3D structure prediction; analysis of gene expression data. This includes dynamic programming, machine learning, simulated annealing, and clustering algorithms. Algorithmic principles will be emphasized. A project is required.
COMP 6821 Bioinformatics Databases and Systems (4 credits)
The principal objectives of the course are to survey the needs of bioinformatics for data management, knowledge management, and computational support; to provide in-depth description of an example of each kind of database and system; and to introduce advanced database technology and software technology relevant to the needs of bioinformatics. A project is required.
COMP 691 Topics in Computer Science I (4 credits)
Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, providing that course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g., COMP 691A, COMP 691B, etc.
COMP 6961 Graduate Seminar in Computer Science (1 credit)
Students will have to attend a selected set of departmental seminars and submit a comprehensive report on the topics presented in one of the seminars. This course is graded on a pass/fail basis.
COMP 6971 Project and Report (4 credits)
Prerequisite: Completion of 16 credits; a CGPA of 3.40 or greater; permission of the Department.
See Requirements for the Master of/Magisteriate in Applied Computer Science (MApCompSc) section. Project: 8 hours per week.
Note: Students who have received credit for SOEN 6951 or SOEN 6971 may not take this course for credit.
COMP 7241 Parallel Algorithms and Architectures (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COMP 6281 or permission of instructor.
Parallel architectures; memory organization, interconnection structures, data routing techniques. Parallel algorithms; paradigms and design techniques, complexity analysis, algorithms for various computation models. A project is required.
COMP 7251 Mobile Computing and Wireless Networks (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COMP 6461.
Introduction to mobile computing and wireless networks:local (LAN), personal (PAN) and metropolitan (MAN). Mobile ad hoc networks and sensor networks. Algorithms and protocols for medium access, routing, topology control, and reliable transport. A project is required.
COMP 7451 Semantics of Programming Languages (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COMP 6411.
The need for semantic descriptions of programming languages. Classification of semantics: operational, axiomatic, model-theoretic, algebraic, denotational. Classification of languages: procedural, functional, logic, equational. Applications: verification, construction, language design, temporal logic for distributed systems, semantics for advanced languages.
COMP 7521 Cryptography and Data Security (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COMP 6651.
Traditional cryptography. Information theory. Private-key (symmetric-key) and public-key (asymmetric-key) cryptographic algorithms. Advanced Encryption Standard (Rijndael). Cryptographic hash functions. Digital signatures. Data-origin authentication and data integrity. Entity authentication. Key distribution, management, recovery, and exhaustion. Authentication protocols. Security services (confidentiality, authentication, integrity, access control, non-repudiation, and availability) and mechanisms (encryption, data-integrity mechanisms, digital signatures, keyed hashes, access-control mechanisms, challenge-response authentication, traffic padding, and routing control). Projects will be offered in selected topics in cryptography.
COMP 7531 Database Systems Principles (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COMP 6521.
Database models. Algebraic, logical, and deductive database languages. Query equivalence and optimization. Query rewriting, information integration and data exchange. Incomplete information and complex values. Introduction to current research topics. A project is required.
COMP 7651 Advanced Analysis of Algorithms (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COMP 6651.
Amortized analysis of algorithms, NP-hardness and approximation algorithms, online algorithms, randomized algorithms. Selected topics of current interest. Project or term paper.
COMP 7661 Advanced Rendering and Animation (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COMP 6761.
Advanced concepts in rendering and animation with emphasis on computational techniques for synthesizing complex realistic images, both static and dynamic. Topics include: overview of computer graphics techniques in games, cinema, and engineering; realistic rendering methods in real time; animation techniques including physics-based animation. A project is required.
COMP 7751 Advanced Pattern Recognition (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COMP 6731.
Pattern recognition principles; modern methods in digitization and data acquisition; advanced topics in feature extraction and selection; principal component analysis and clustering techniques; multiple classifiers and expert systems; advanced topics in neural networks in pattern recognition, performance evaluation and error reduction. Applications. A project is required.
COMP 7781 Advanced Image Processing (4 credits)
Prerequisite: COMP 6771 or permission of instructor.
Digital image processing; segmentation morphological processing; wavelet transforms and multi-resolution analysis; partial differential equation approach; variational methods; diffusion and shock filters; Markov random field and Bayesian inference; energy minimization framework: snakes, active contours, Mumford-Shah model, level set method; numerical implementation; applications; image inpainting; registration; and document processing. A project is required.
COMP 791 Topics in Computer Science II (4 credits)
Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, providing that course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. COMP 791A, COMP 791B, etc.
COMP 7941 Master’s Research and Thesis (29 credits)
Students are required to submit a thesis prepared under the guidance of a faculty member appointed by the GCS Graduate Studies Committee. The thesis must represent the result of the student’s independent work undertaken after admission to the program. The thesis will be evaluated by a committee appointed by the GCS Graduate Studies Committee.
COMP 8901 Doctoral Research and Thesis (70 credits)
SOEN 6011 Software Engineering Processes (4 credits)
Introduction to software engineering concepts, modern management processes and software lifecycles. Tracking of software requirements and development through issue trackers. Version control practices include integration of feature branching. Validation practices including testing frameworks and code review. Continuous integration and build environments. A practical component on setting up a development environment similar to those used in professional environments. Case studies of successful management processes from open source projects and industry. A project is required.
SOEN 6021 Software Re-engineering (4 credits)
Prerequisite: SOEN 6461 or permission of the instructor. This course introduces software re-engineering, software architecture recovery and reconstruction, and reflexion models. Students use development history to support reengineering, and are exposed to the latest empirical studies on software reengineering and software metrics applied to software re-engineering. Also, students learn how to apply various software re-engineering patterns and software migration strategies. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for SOEN 691 (Software Re-engineering) may not take this course for credit.
SOEN 6211 Semantic Computing (4 credits)
System analysis, architecture, and engineering for semantic software products. Text Mining systems and their architectures. Tagging and Tag Analysis. Recommender Systems and Collaborative Filtering. Crawling the Blogosphere and Opinion Mining. Applying Clustering, Machine Learning, Classification, and Regression. The Web of Data and Semantic Web Technologies: RDF, RDFS, SPARQL. Linked Open Data (LOD). Design and Re-Use of Semantic Web Vocabularies and Ontologies. Semantic Desktops and Semantic Web Information Systems. Semantic Application Development. Application case studies in biomedical research, software development, business intelligence, online gaming, e-commerce and e-science. Research paper seminar. Empirical evaluation methodologies for semantic systems. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a SOEN 691B number may not take this course for credit.
SOEN 6311 Formal Methods (4 credits)
Components of formal systems: formal methods; levels of formalism. Integrating formal methods into the existing software life-cycle process model for a given project. Attributes of a formal specification language. Formal notations based on extended finite-state machines; case studies involving the design of user interfaces, reactive systems, and concurrent systems. Software development using formal methods, including tools for: type checking; debugging; verifying checkable properties; validation of refinements; and code generation from refinements. A project is required.
SOEN 6431 Software Comprehension and Maintenance (4 credits)
The course addresses both technical and managerial views of software comprehension and software maintenance issues. Topics covered in this course include: cognitive models, software visualization, CASE tools, reverse engineering, static and dynamic source code analysis, software configuration management, and introduction to current research topics in software maintenance and program comprehension. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for COMP 6431 may not take this course for credit.
SOEN 6441 Advanced Programming Practices (4 credits)
Problems of writing and managing code. Managing code complexity and quality through a programming process. Self-documenting code, and documentation generation. Software configuration management. Best practices for writing unit tests to control code quality. Advanced practices such as multi-threading concurrency, code reuse, and fault tolerance. A project is required. Laboratory: two hours per week.
SOEN 6461 Software Design Methodologies (4 credits)
Introduction to software design processes and their models. Representations of design/architecture. Software architectures and design plans. Design methods, object-oriented application frameworks, design patterns, design quality and assurance, coupling and cohesion measurements, design verification and documentation. A design project.
Note: Students who have received credit for COMP 6471 before September 2011 may not take this course for credit.
SOEN 6471 Advanced Software Architectures (4 credits)
Study of architectural view models, architectural styles and frameworks; Architectural case studies and extraction of concrete architecture; Architectural design patterns; Model Driven Architecture (MDA), Service Oriented Architecture (SOA). Domain specific architectures such as mobile and cloud computing. A project is required.
SOEN 6481 Software Systems Requirements Specification (4 credits)
The requirements engineering (RE) process. Requirements engineering in different software lifecycle models. Problem analysis. Requirements elicitation. Requirements evaluation. Inconsistency management. Risk analysis. Requirements prioritization and negotiation. Requirements specification: natural language documentation, IEEE and ISO standards. Use cases. Agile processes and user stories. Introduction to formal specification: logics, formal languages. Requirements quality assurance. RE tools. Requirements evolution. Traceability. Domain modelling: UML, ontologies, domain-specific languages. Modelling behaviour. Acceptance criteria. Test cases. Cost models. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for COMP 6481 may not take this course for credit.
SOEN 6491 Software Refactoring (4 credits)
Prerequisite: SOEN 6461.
Topics include an introduction to preventive maintenance, design problems, and refactorings; techniques for the detection of design problems and refactoring opportunities; management of preventive maintenance: visualization, prioritization, ranking, and evolution tracking of design problems; empirical studies on refactoring activities and practices; implementation of source code analysis techniques and refactorings. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for SOEN 691C (Software Refactoring) may not take this course for credit.
SOEN 6501 Programming Competency Test (No credit value)
See Requirements for the Master of/Magisteriate in Applied Computer Science (MApCompSc) or Master of/Magisteriate in Engineering (Software Engineering) sections.
SOEN 6611 Software Measurement (4 credits)
Role of measurement in Software Engineering, theoretical, technical and managerial views on software measurement. Representational theory of measurement. Theoretical validation of software measurement. Goal-driven measurement. Collecting and analyzing software engineering data. Software quality modelling and measuring. Testing and measurement. Reliability models. Functional size measurement methods. Effort estimation models and their usage in project management. Software measurement standards. Tool support. Case studies. A project is required.
SOEN 6751 Human Computer Interface Design (4 credits)
Introduction to human computer interaction. User-centered design process. User modelling. Task analysis. User interface design knowledge (principles, guidelines and patterns). User interface prototyping. User interface evaluation. A project is required. Laboratory: two hours per week.
Note: Note: Students who have received credit for COMP 6751 before September 2011 may not take this course for credit.
SOEN 6761 Multimedia Computing (4 credits)
This course covers the state-of-the-art technology for multimedia computing. The course topics will cover current media types, images, video, audio, graphics and 3D models in terms of algorithms and data structures for their capture, representation, creation, storage, archival, transmission, assembling, presentation and retrieval. This course will cover fundamental ideas in multimedia technology applicable to computer science and software engineering. A project is required.
SOEN 6841 Software Project Management (4 credits)
Fundamental concepts of management activities, demonstrating how it can relate to software engineering and how the two can be mutually supportive throughout software development and maintenance. Overview of object-oriented development; software development processes; quality considerations; activity planning; risk management; monitoring and control; maintenance and evolution; issues of professional ethics and practice, and legal issues. A project is required.
SOEN 6861 Services Computing: Foundations, Design and Implementations (4 credits)
System design with Service Oriented Architecture. Open standards for Web services. Development of SOAP (Service-Oriented Architecture and Programming) and RESTful (REpresentational State Transfer) services. Business process modelling and management. Service composition. Formal models for services. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for SOEN 691A (Services Computing: Foundations, Design and Implementations) may not take this course for credit.
SOEN 691 Topics in Software Engineering (4 credits)
Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. SOEN 691A, SOEN 691B, etc.
SOEN 6951 Software Engineering Case Study (4 credits)
Students will complete a case study of a software project. Whenever possible, the project should be conducted in an industrial environment with the cooperation of the student’s employer.
Note: Students who have received credit for SOEN 6971 or COMP 6971 may not take this course for credit.
SOEN 6971 Project and Report (4 credits)
Prerequisite: Completion of 16 credits; a CGPA of 3.40 or greater; permission of the Department.
See Requirements for the Degree of Master of/Magisteriate in Applied Computer Science (MApCompSc) section. Project: 8 hours per week.
Note: Students who have received credit for COMP 6971 or SOEN 6951 may not take this course for credit.
SOEN 7481 Software Verification and Testing (4 credits)
Prerequisites: SOEN 6461, SOEN 6481.
Overview of current software engineering testing methods, techniques and standards for testing system implementations. Classical white-box testing; dataflow testing; classical black-box testing; integration testing; system testing. Testing measures; test plan. IEEE standard. Object-oriented testing. Test-driven development. Testing quality measures. Test reduction techniques. Techniques for test automation. Tools and techniques for formal verification of software system designs: model checking and theorem proving. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for COMP 7481 may not take this course for credit.
SOEN 7761 Intelligent User Interfaces (4 credits)
Prerequisite: SOEN 6751.
Intelligent systems and intelligent interfaces. A brief introduction to knowledge representation and reasoning. Creation and adaptation of user models. Software agents at the user interface. Applications of these concepts in the development of intelligent user interfaces. Adaptive user interfaces. Selected advanced topics, such as natural language interfaces, speech based user interfaces, and mobile user interfaces. Laboratory: two hours per week. A project is required.
Note: Students who have received credit for COMP 7761 before September 2011 may not take this course for credit.
SOEN 791 Topics in Software Engineering II (4 credits)
Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, providing that the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by the letter following the course number, e.g. SOEN 791A, SOEN 791B, etc.
SOEN 7941 Master’s Research and Thesis (29 credits)
Students are required to submit a thesis prepared under the guidance of a faculty member appointed by the GCS Graduate Studies Committee. The thesis must represent the result of the student’s independent work undertaken after admission to the program. The thesis will be evaluated by a committee appointed by the GCS Graduate Studies Committee.
SOEN 8901 Doctoral Research and Thesis (70 credits)
ARTE 806 Inquiry Through Art Production (3 credits)
In this course students identify the content and the processes essential to their on-going studio performance. Students are expected to develop parallel inquiry into exhibitions, installations, performances, documentations, notation systems and related readings. Evaluation is based on workshop and seminar participation, studio performance and class presentations. Computer access and shared studio space are available. This course may be repeated as ARTE 807.
ARTE 850 Selected Topics in Art Education (3 credits)
A seminar course offering students the opportunity to study various aspects of art education. Specific topics vary from year to year to take advantage of the special expertise of the faculty.
ARTE 867 Directed Studies in Art Education I (3 credits)
Independent study in the area of concentration.
ARTE 868 Directed Studies in Art Education II (3 credits)
Independent study in the area of concentration.
ARTE 870 Critical Perspectives on Art Education: History, Theory and Practice (3 credits)
A seminar course in which students develop critical reading and writing skills while adding to their understanding of developments past and present that have shaped the field of art education.
ARTE 872 Advanced Critical Analysis (3 credits)
Prerequisite: ARTE 870.
A seminar course in which students develop advanced skills in critical analysis, academic writing and library research. Assignments include compiling and writing a review of literature related to thesis research. Students develop questions related to their area of research and professional interest to be used on their PhD comprehensive examination.
ARTE 882 Research Practice (3 credits)
A seminar course in which students conduct a small scale research project based on their own research proposal.
ARTE 883 Comprehensive Examination (no credit)
Each student must successfully complete the doctoral comprehensive examination in order to be admitted to candidacy. The comprehensive examination is composed of written and oral components.
ARTE 884 Doctoral Seminar (3 credits)
This course addresses research and communication, thesis writing, and professional practice.
ARTE 890 Research and Thesis (63 credits)
Includes thesis proposal and its approval by the Thesis Advisory Committee, Research (including any further study that may be required to gain needed expertise), written thesis and oral examination. Students are encouraged to periodically present their research-in-progress to academic and professional audiences.
The following courses are cross-listed at the MA and PhD levels:
MA
PhD
ARTE 606
ARTE 660
ARTE 670
ARTE 672
ARTE 682
ARTE 806
ARTE 850
ARTE 870
ARTE 872
ARTE 882
ARTE 606 Topics in Studio Inquiry (3 credits)
In this course students identify the content and the processes essential to their on-going studio performance. Students are expected to develop parallel inquiry into exhibitions, installations, performances, documentations, notation systems and related readings. Evaluation is based on workshop and seminar participation, studio performance and class presentations. Computer access and shared studio space are available. This course may be repeated as ARTE 607, 608, 609, 610, 611.
ARTE 660 Selected Topics in Art Education (3 credits)
A seminar course offering students the opportunity to study various aspects of art education. Specific topics vary from year to year to take advantage of the special expertise of the faculty.
ARTE 670 Critical Perspectives on Art Education History: History, Theory and Practice (3 credits)
A seminar course in which students develop critical reading and writing skills while adding to their understanding of developments past and present that have shaped the field of art education.
ARTE 672 Advanced Critical Analysis (3 credits)
Prerequisite: ARTE 670.
A seminar course in which students develop advanced skills in critical analysis, academic writing and library research. Assignments include compiling and writing a review of literature on a topic of research or professional interest.
ARTE 680 Foundations for Inquiry (3 credits)
A seminar course in which students are introduced to the basic concepts, terminology, and contexts of inquiry in art education. Students learn about the practice of systematic inquiry, including: identifying and articulating a topic or question; situating the inquiry within a theoretical framework; relating the inquiry to art education practices; and selecting appropriate inquiry procedures. Each student develops a proposal for a small-scale project related to his/her particular art education interests.
ARTE 682 Research Practice (3 credits)
Prerequisite: ARTE 680.
A seminar course in which students conduct a small-scale research project based on their own research proposal. Students are introduced to appropriate forms and practices for conducting the project and presenting the results.
ARTE 698 Thesis
The thesis topic is chosen in consultation with the thesis supervisor, and is approved by the thesis advisory committee. Students produce a thesis proposal; conduct the proposed inquiry; produce the thesis; and present it orally to their thesis advisory committee. Guidelines for the thesis are described in Thesis Preparation Guide available from the School of Graduate Studies and Art Education’s Master of Arts Thesis Procedures available from the department’s programs office.
Scholarly Thesis (24 credits)
Students develop a research based scholarly thesis in consultation with the faculty supervisor. The thesis is a minimum of 20,000 words and must address a research question or problem through an empirical or philosophical investigation. The thesis must include a discussion that documents the student’s reflections upon the methods and procedures employed, and the actual findings that resulted from an examination of the problem. The thesis culminates in a discussion of its implications for art education theory and/or practice. The thesis is presented to the advisory committee for evaluation, and for defence in an oral examination.
Studio-based Thesis (24 credits)
Students develop a cohesive body of artwork for presentation and a minimum 10,000 word written thesis component comprising a review of literature and other relevant resources, a theoretical and methodological contextualization, a critical reflection on the project and its outcomes, a linking of art making with art education and other areas of analysis as deemed necessary by the student and the student’s advisory committee. The artwork and text, together comprising the thesis, are presented to the advisory committee. Evaluation includes an oral examination on both components.
Teaching-based Thesis (24 credits)
Students organize and conduct a professional teaching project, develop a teaching dossier, and write a thesis text directly related to art education, with the guidance of the faculty supervisor. The project may be carried out on site in an educational setting or institution. In the written component of the thesis (minimum10,000 words) students document, analyze and evaluate the project, presenting a literature review, a theoretical and methodological contextualization, and a critical reflection on the project and its outcomes. Evaluation includes an oral examination on this text, on the teaching portfolio, and on the outcomes of the project.
ARTE 664 Independent Study(3 credits)
ARTE 665 Independent Study (3 credits)
The following courses are cross-listed at the MA and PhD levels:
MA
PhD
ARTE 606
ARTE 660
ARTE 670
ARTE 672
ARTE 682
ARTE 806
ARTE 850
ARTE 870
ARTE 872
ARTE 882
ARTH 610 Selected Issues in North American Art and Architectural History (3 credits)
An examination of selected issues in the production of or writing about the visual arts in North America.
ARTH 611 Industrialization and the Built Environment (3 credits)
An examination of selected aspects of the built environment when considered as more than a physical accumulation of structures.
ARTH 612 Contextualizing North American Sculpture: Topics in History, Theory and Practice (3 credits)
An examination of selected topics in the production of or writing about sculpture in North America.
ARTH 613 Special Topics in Indigenous Art and Art History (3 credits)
Selected topics pertaining to the evolving arts practices of Indigenous peoples, considering such themes as collection and exhibition, commodity, continuity, and power relationships.
ARTH 614 Issues and Topics in Craft Studies (3 credits)
Selected topics pertaining to the theory and practice of craft within a North American context.
ARTH 615 Issues in Postcolonial Theory in Art and Art History (3 credits)
Selected aspects of post-colonial and diasporic theory as they relate to North American art and art history.
ARTH 621 Collecting and Patronage in Canada (3 credits)
Investigations related to how and for whom Canadian art has been commissioned and collected.
ARTH 626 Nationhood and Identity in Canadian Art (3 credits)
ARTH 627 Feminism, Art, Art History (3 credits)
Aspects of feminism in relation to the production of art and writing about art in North America.
ARTH 633 Creative and Critical Literature in Art History (3 credits)
Aspects of the relationship between art and text, such as artists’ books, the impact of critical writing on art practice, etc.
ARTH 635 Topics in Canadian Painting (3 credits)
Selected topics pertaining to the practice of painting in Canada.
ARTH 636 Seminar in Canadian Architecture (3 credits)
Selected topics pertaining to the practice of architecture in Canada.
ARTH 638 Topics in Canadian Photography (3 credits)
Selected topics pertaining to the practice of photography in Canada.
ARTH 639 Issues in North American Architectural History (3 credits)
Selected issues pertaining to the production of or writing about architecture in North America.
ARTH 640 Issues in North American Photographic History (3 credits)
Selected issues pertaining to the production of or writing about photography in North America.
ARTH 641 Issues in Visual and Material Culture (3 credits)
Selected issues pertaining to the integration into art history of visual image/phenomena and material objects not traditionally considered to have fallen within definitions of the “fine arts”.
ARTH 642 Aspects of Media and New Media (3 credits)
Aspects of the historical development, thematic content and conceptual strategies of practices involving media and “new technologies.
ARTH 643 Topics in Art and Globalization (3 credits)
An examination of selected topics pertaining to the manner in which art has negotiated and continues to negotiate globalization.
ARTH 647 Independent Studies in North American Art History (3 credits)
ARTH 648 Aspects of Museum and Curatorial Studies: Theory (3 credits)
Aspects of the theoretical underpinnings of museum and curatorial practices.
ARTH 649 Aspects of Curatorial Practice (3 credits)
The development and application of curatorial knowledge, skills and practices as fostered through the organization of an exhibition and related events.
ARTH 650 Supervised Internship (3 credits)
Students undertake an internship at an arts organization and perform concrete tasks designed to enhance their learning through practical experience (e.g. curating an exhibition, writing a catalogue essay, editing a publication, organizing a speakers' series) and also reflect on that experience. Students have an academic supervisor as well as on-site supervision. The internship involves 150 hours of work and is approved by the academic supervisor and the graduate program director, who ensure that the tasks, learning objectives and assessments are consistent with the objectives of the MA program.
ARTH 654 Annotated Review of Sources and Documents (3 credits)
Students take this individualized study course with their supervisor, normally in the summer term following the first year of study. This course must be completed before students begin writing their thesis. Supervisor and students meet to determine the list of scholarly texts and/or archival materials to be addessed in order to strengthen the students' foundational knowledge of their designated research field and prepare them for writing the thesis.The students are responsible for a series of annotations, together with an essay that synthesizes the annotated material (total word count approximately 6000 words).
ARTH 655 Thesis Seminar (3 credits)
Prerequisite: ARTH 654.
This course is designed to introduce students to the intellectual and professional aspects of graduate school and academia, such as writing a thesis, conducting research, engaging with art historical theory and methodologies, giving a conference paper, applying for grants. Credit for this pass/fail seminar is accorded once the students have delivered their thesis presentation during the second year of the program.
ARTH 656 Thesis (24 credits)
CATS 689: Research Paper (9 credits)
OR
CATS 698: Applied Research Project with Report (6 credits) and
CATS 699: Comprehensive Exam (3 credits).
Practicum. In addition to the credit requirements, and as stipulated by the professional program approval associations (the American Art Therapy Association and the Canadian Art Therapy Association), each student must successfully complete a minimum of 800 hours (350 direct client contact hours and 450 agency hours) in the practice of art therapy, under faculty supervision, in an approved practicum setting. The program emphasizes experience with individual, group, and family formats for therapeutic interventions. Students work with different client populations during the first and second year of the practicum.
CATS 689: Research Paper. The research paper represents the formal culmination of graduate studies in creative arts therapies. This paper includes a literature review and may also include methodology, specific procedures, research population or sample, data collection and analysis, as appropriate to the topic approved by the Creative Arts Therapies Research and Ethics Committee. Students develop their proposals for submission to this Committee as a course requirement for CATS 691. The required research courses (CATS 691 and ATRP 693) aim to provide students with knowledge of specific research methodologies.
CATS 698: Applied Research Project with Report and CATS 699: Comprehensive Exam. The student chooses this project to further explore specific pilot project reports, feasibility studies and research with artistic, photographic or video documentation relevant to the creative arts therapies. All applied projects must include a written component, and be presented by each student as a public seminar upon completion. An oral/written comprehensive case study examination must be taken to demonstrate integrative aspects of learning and knowledge in the study of art therapy.
Language Requirements. While there are no formal language requirements, students intending to work in Quebec are strongly encouraged to develop a working knowledge of French.
Academic Regulations
Academic Standing. Please refer to the Academic Standing section of the Calendar for a detailed review of the Academic Regulations.
Residence. The minimum residence requirement is two years (5 terms) of full-time study, or the equivalent in part-time study.
Time Limit. Please refer to the Academic Regulation page for further details regarding the Time Limit requirements.
Graduation Requirement. In order to graduate, students must have obtained a cumulative GPA of at least 2.70.
Courses
CATS 609 Introduction to Dance/Movement Therapy (3 credits)
This course provides an introduction to the foundations and primary concepts of dance/movement therapy and explores their relevance and applications to other creative arts therapies modalities through experiential, somatic, and theoretical approaches.
CATS 610 Introduction to Topics in Clinical Psychology for Creative Arts Therapists (3 credits)
This seminar introduces creative arts therapists to the various psychopathologies, their symptomatologies, etiologies, current Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM) diagnostic criteria, and treatments.
Note: Credit received for CATS 610 cannot be applied towards a graduate program in Psychology.
CATS 611 Counselling Skills for Creative Arts Therapists (3 credits)
This course introduces basic skills and practices of counselling and psychotherapy for creative arts therapists. It provides the opportunity to explore, develop, and practice the skills required for effective therapeutic interventions across varied theoretical orientations and treatment approaches. The course focuses on the therapeutic relationship and the therapeutic frame.
CATS 615 Independent Practicum in the Creative Arts Therapies (3 credits)
Prerequisites: ATRP 613, 614.
With the Department’s approval and in agreement with a faculty supervisor, additional practicum experience is offered on an individual basis to students in special circumstances. A case study is required.
CATS 631A Selected Issues in the Creative Arts Therapies (3 credits)
This course may be repeated as CATS 631B, 631C, etc.
CATS 636 Independent Studies in Creative Arts Therapies (3 credits)
This course may be repeated as CATS 637.
CATS 638 Creative Process in Clinical Practice for Creative Arts Therapists (3 credits)
This course provides experiential learning in the clinical application of creative projection techniques through a methodology based on exploring character in myth and fairy tale. The creative process is examined through readings, discussions, masks, movement, music and drama.
CATS 639 Interdisciplinary Topics: Cross-cultural Competence in the Creative Arts Therapies (1 credit)
This course presents cross-cultural competence as an ethical obligation, providing an overview of multi-cultural counselling theory. Students explore challenges and opportunities arising in creative arts therapies clinical practice within an environment of cultural diversity as it relates to both the therapist and the client.
CATS 640 Studio Media and Practice for Creative Arts Therapists (3 credits)
Students develop skills with a variety of studio media and processes in their own creative arts discipline, while experiencing the media and creative process of an allied discipline. Commonalities and factors unique to each are examined for their potential in interdisciplinary practice.
CATS 641 Interdisciplinary Topics: Ethics in Clinical Practice in the Creative Arts Therapies (1 credit)
This course covers ethical standards and requirements for clinical practice as established by both professional mental health and creative arts therapies associations. Students become familiar with expectations of professional and personal conduct as well as models for ethical decision-making. Students also gain an understanding of their personal value systems in relation to their work as creative arts therapists and how those values may inform ethical decision-making within their clinical practice.
CATS 643 Interdisciplinary Topics: Ethics in Research in the Creative Arts Therapies (1 credit)
This course covers ethical standards and requirements for research as established by both professional mental health and creative arts therapies associations. Students become familiar with expectations of professional and personal conduct with respect to research in the field, including research protocols for both the Department of Creative Arts Therapies and Concordia University.
CATS 645 Family Systems and the Creative Arts Therapies (3 credits)
Family systems theory is introduced and specific theories and practices of family therapy are considered. Indications for the use of family therapy and its integration with the creative arts therapies are explored, as are specific methods of assessment and intervention.
CATS 689 Research Paper (9 credits)
Prerequisite: CATS 691.
The research paper is the formal culmination of graduate studies in the creative arts therapies. This paper includes a literature review, and may also include methodology, specific procedures, research population or sample, data collection and analysis, as appropriate to the topic approved by the Creative Arts Therapies Research and Ethics Committee. Students develop their proposals for this paper as a course requirement for CATS 691, to be submitted for approval to the Research and Ethics Committee in the winter term of their first year in the program. The Committee will then assign one faculty member in the Department to supervise each paper. The nine-credit component appears on the student record only once the final version of the research paper has been submitted to the Thesis Office and the Graduate Grade Activity Report Form, granting a grade of PASS, has been submitted to the Office of the Registrar.
CATS 691 Research in the Creative Arts Therapies (3 credits)
This course presents an overview of qualitative research, theory and methodology, and their application to the creative arts therapies. Students develop critical reading skills and explore ethical issues involved in research.
CATS 698 Applied Research Project with Report (6 credits)
The student chooses this option to further explore specific pilot project reports, feasibility studies and creative research designs utilizing media intrinsic to the creative arts therapies. All applied projects must include a written component and be presented as a public seminar upon completion.
CATS 699 Comprehensive Exam (3 credits)
Art Therapy Option Courses
ATRP 600 Readings in Art Therapy (3 credits)
This course provides grounding in significant schools of psychological thought and their relevance to art therapy. It also promotes advanced knowledge and understanding of the therapeutic relationship and process from a psychodynamic perspective. Studied psychotherapeutic models include: psychodynamic, object relations, humanistic, cognitive-behavioural, as well as theories of trauma.
ATRP 602 Assessment Techniques in Art Therapy (3 credits)
This course emphasizes an understanding and experience of the purpose and process of various assessments in art therapy. The theory and practice of art therapy assessment in both clinical work and research are reviewed within the context of different populations.
ATRP 603 Symbolic Imagery and Art Therapy - Studio/Workshop (3 credits)
Through experiential art workshops and readings, symbols and the symbolic/metaphoric function are examined with reference to various psychological models, including Freudian psychoanalysis, Jungian analytical psychology and Hillman’s archetypal/imaginal psychology. Students develop an understanding of art therapy methodology by exploring personal imagery.
ATRP 604 Group and Family Art Therapy (3 credits)
This course provides a dialectical, experiential and practical examination of the major approaches to group dynamics, including psychodynamic, humanistic, systemic, and theories of communication. Stages, theories and clinical applications of group art therapy processes are explored.
ATRP 613 Art Therapy Practicum Supervision I (3 credits)
In this course, students acquire skills in the implementation of the principles of psychotherapy within the practices of art therapy with a selected population. Students learn observation and assessment procedures, treatment planning, skills in establishing and maintaining the therapeutic relationship, on-going evaluation, methods of clinical documentation, and professional reporting in multidisciplinary teams. Individual and group supervision are provided. A minimum of 150 practicum hours is required.
ATRP 614 Art Therapy Practicum Supervision II (3 credits)
Prerequisite: ATRP 613.
This course is a continuation of ATRP 613. A minimum of 200 practicum hours is required.
ATRP 620 Art Therapy Advanced Clinical Skills (3 credits)
This course is designed to refine students’ clinical skills and deepen understanding of the practice of art therapy from a psychodynamic perspective. Through role-play experience and clinical discussion in a seminar format, therapeutic issues which students encounter during their fieldwork are explored.
ATRP 623 Advanced Art Therapy Practicum Supervision I (3 credits)
Prerequisites: ATRP 613, 614.
This course is designed to promote the consolidation of students’ abilities in the practice of art therapy, to further develop clinical skills, and deepen psychotherapeutic understanding. Individual and group supervision are provided. Case presentations, readings and clinical analysis of therapeutic issues are integral to this course. A minimum of 200 practicum hours is required.
ATRP 624 Advanced Art Therapy Practicum Supervision II (3 credits)
Prerequisites: ATRP 613, 614, 623.
This course is a continuation of ATRP 623. A minimum of 250 practicum hours is required.
ATRP 630 Child and Adolescent Art Therapy (3 credits)
This course promotes an understanding of the theory and practice of art therapy with children and adolescents. Clinical applications of art therapy within diverse child and adolescent populations are examined with reference to the systemic, psychodynamic and cognitive models. Appropriate use of artistic media and play techniques are studied.
ATRP 693 Research in Art Therapy (3 credits)
Prerequisite: CATS 691.
This course is designed to foster the acquisition of knowledge and methodological tools in arts-based, qualitative and quantitative methods relevant to the field of art therapy. Emphasis is placed on the use of the practical tools necessary to conduct reliable and valid research.
CATS 689: Research Paper (9 credits)
OR
CATS 698: Applied Research Project with Report (6 credits) and
CATS 699: Comprehensive Exam (3 credits).
Practicum. In addition to the credit requirements, and as stipulated by the professional program approval of the National Association for Drama Therapy, each student must successfully complete a minimum of 800 hours (350 direct client contact hours and 450 agency hours) in the practice of drama therapy, under faculty supervision, in an approved practicum setting. The program emphasizes experience with individual, group, and family formats for therapeutic interventions. Students work with different client populations during the first and second year of the practicum.
CATS 689: Research Paper. The research paper represents the formal culmination of graduate studies in the creative arts therapies. This paper includes a literature review and may also include methodology, specific procedures, research population or sample, data collection and analysis, as appropriate to the topic approved by the Creative Arts Therapies Research and Ethics Committee. Students develop their proposals for submission to this Committee as a course requirement for CATS 691. The required research courses (CATS 691 and DTHY 693) aim to provide students with knowledge of specific research methodologies.
CATS 698: Applied Research Project with Report and CATS 699: Comprehensive Exam. The student chooses this project to further explore specific pilot project reports, feasibility studies and research with performance, photographic or video documentation relevant to the creative arts therapies. All applied projects must include a written component, and be presented by each student as a public seminar upon completion. An oral/written comprehensive case study examination must be taken to demonstrate integrative aspects of learning and knowledge in the study of drama therapy.
Language Requirements. While there are no formal language requirements, students intending to work in Quebec are strongly encouraged to develop a working knowledge of French.
Academic Regulations
Academic Standing. Please refer to the Academic Standing section of the Calendar for a detailed review of the Academic Regulations.
Residence. The minimum residence requirement is two years (5 terms) of full-time study, or the equivalent in part-time study.
Time Limit. Please refer to the Academic Regulation page for further details regarding the Time Limit requirements.
Graduation Requirement. In order to graduate, students must have obtained a cumulative GPA of at least 2.70.
Courses
CATS 609 Introduction to Dance/Movement Therapy (3 credits)
This course provides an introduction to the foundations and primary concepts of dance/movement therapy and explores their relevance and applications to other creative arts therapies modalities through experiential, somatic, and theoretical approaches.
CATS 610 Introduction to Topics in Clinical Psychology for Creative Arts Therapists (3 credits)
This seminar introduces creative arts therapists to the various psychopathologies, their symptomatologies, etiologies, current Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM) diagnostic criteria, and treatments.
Note: Credit received for CATS 610 cannot be applied towards a graduate program in Psychology.
CATS 611 Counselling Skills for Creative Arts Therapists (3 credits)
This course introduces basic skills and practices of counselling and psychotherapy for creative arts therapists. It provides the opportunity to explore, develop, and practice the skills required for effective therapeutic interventions across varied theoretical orientations and treatment approaches. The course focuses on the therapeutic relationship and the therapeutic frame.
CATS 615 Independent Practicum in the Creative Arts Therapies (3 credits)
Prerequisites: ATRP 613, 614.
With the Department’s approval and in agreement with a faculty supervisor, additional practicum experience is offered on an individual basis to students in special circumstances. A case study is required.
CATS 631A Selected Issues in the Creative Arts Therapies (3 credits)
This course may be repeated as CATS 631B, 631C, etc.
CATS 636 Independent Studies in Creative Arts Therapies (3 credits)
This course may be repeated as CATS 637.
CATS 638 Creative Process in Clinical Practice for Creative Arts Therapists (3 credits)
This course provides experiential learning in the clinical application of creative projection techniques through a methodology based on exploring character in myth and fairy tale. The creative process is examined through readings, discussions, masks, movement, music and drama.
CATS 639 Interdisciplinary Topics: Cross-cultural Competence in the Creative Arts Therapies (1 credit)
This course presents cross-cultural competence as an ethical obligation, providing an overview of multi-cultural counselling theory. Students explore challenges and opportunities arising in creative arts therapies clinical practice within an environment of cultural diversity as it relates to both the therapist and the client.
CATS 640 Studio Media and Practice for Creative Arts Therapists (3 credits)
Students develop skills with a variety of studio media and processes in their own creative arts discipline, while experiencing the media and creative process of an allied discipline. Commonalities and factors unique to each are examined for their potential in interdisciplinary practice.
CATS 641 Interdisciplinary Topics: Ethics in Clinical Practice in the Creative Arts Therapies (1 credit)
This course covers ethical standards and requirements for clinical practice as established by both professional mental health and creative arts therapies associations. Students become familiar with expectations of professional and personal conduct as well as models for ethical decision-making. Students also gain an understanding of their personal value systems in relation to their work as creative arts therapists and how those values may inform ethical decision-making within their clinical practice.
CATS 643 Interdisciplinary Topics: Ethics in Research in the Creative Arts Therapies (1 credit)
This course covers ethical standards and requirements for research as established by both professional mental health and creative arts therapies associations. Students become familiar with expectations of professional and personal conduct with respect to research in the field, including research protocols for both the Department of Creative Arts Therapies and Concordia University.
CATS 645 Family Systems and the Creative Arts Therapies (3 credits)
Family systems theory is introduced and specific theories and practices of family therapy are considered. Indications for the use of family therapy and its integration with the creative arts therapies are explored, as are specific methods of assessment and intervention.
CATS 689 Research Paper (9 credits)
Prerequisite: CATS 691.
The research paper is the formal culmination of graduate studies in the creative arts therapies. This paper includes a literature review, and may also include methodology, specific procedures, research population or sample, data collection and analysis, as appropriate to the topic approved by the Creative Arts Therapies Research and Ethics Committee. Students develop their proposals for this paper as a course requirement for CATS 691, to be submitted for approval to the Research and Ethics Committee in the winter term of their first year in the program. The Committee will then assign one faculty member in the Department to supervise each paper. The nine-credit component appears on the student record only once the final version of the research paper has been submitted to the Thesis Office and the Graduate Grade Activity Report Form, granting a grade of PASS, has been submitted to the Office of the Registrar.
CATS 691 Research in the Creative Arts Therapies (3 credits)
This course presents an overview of qualitative research, theory and methodology, and their application to the creative arts therapies. Students develop critical reading skills and explore ethical issues involved in research.
CATS 698 Applied Research Project with Report (6 credits)
The student chooses this option to further explore specific pilot project reports, feasibility studies and creative research designs utilizing media intrinsic to the creative arts therapies. All applied projects must include a written component and be presented as a public seminar upon completion.
CATS 699 Comprehensive Exam (3 credits)
Drama Therapy Option Courses
DTHY 600 Current Approaches to Drama Therapy (3 credits)
This course provides grounding in significant theoretical theories of drama therapy and correlating schools of psychological thought and their relevance to drama therapy. It also promotes advanced knowledge and understanding of the therapeutic relationship and process from several drama therapy, psychodynamic, and psychotherapeutic perspectives. Studied psychotherapeutic models include: psychodynamic, object relations, humanistic, cognitive-behavioural, as well as theories of trauma. Drama therapy models include: role theory, projective techniques, therapeutic theatre, the use of story, and performance techniques.
DTHY 603 Improvisation and Drama Therapy - Studio/Workshop (3 credits)
This course focuses on developing skills in adapting methods of dramatic improvisation for the purpose of therapy, including exploration of projective, playback and psychodramatic techniques. Attention is given to the theory of distancing in terms of therapeutic process and dramatic form.
DTHY 604 Drama Therapy and Groups (3 credits)
This course provides a dialectical, experiential and practical examination of the major approaches to group dynamics, including psychodynamic, humanistic, systemic, and theories of communication. Stages, theories and clinical applications of group drama therapy processes are explored.
DTHY 613 Drama Therapy Practicum Supervision I (3 credits)
In this course, students acquire skills in the implementation of the principles of psychotherapy within the practices of drama therapy with a selected population. Students learn observation and assessment procedures, treatment planning, skills in establishing and maintaining the therapeutic relationship, on-going evaluation, methods of clinical documentation, and professional reporting in multidisciplinary teams. Individual and group supervision are provided. A minimum of 150 practicum hours is required.
DTHY 614 Drama Therapy Practicum Supervision II (3 credits)
Prerequisite: DTHY 613.
This course is a continuation of DTHY 613. A minimum of 200 practicum hours is required.
DTHY 623 Advanced Drama Therapy Practicum Supervision I (3 credits)
Prerequisites: DTHY 613, 614.
This course is designed to promote the consolidation of students’ abilities in the practice of drama therapy, to further develop clinical skills, and deepen psychotherapeutic understanding. Individual and group supervision are provided. Case presentations, readings and clinical analysis of therapeutic issues are integral to this course. A minimum of 200 practicum hours is required.
DTHY 624 Advanced Drama Therapy Practicum Supervision II (3 credits)
Prerequisites: DTHY 613, 614, 623.
This course is a continuation of DTHY 623. A minimum of 250 practicum hours is required.
DTHY 643 Sociodrama and Psychodrama (3 credits)
Sociodrama and psychodrama practices are examined for their use as treatment modalities in drama therapy. Seminars and experiential methods of instruction integrate their practice into the aims and principles of drama therapy.
DTHY 644 Child and Adolescent Drama Therapy (3 credits)
This course focuses on the methodologies, processes, and assessment techniques as they relate to drama therapy, play and play therapy with children and adolescents, and their families.
DTHY 645 Assessment in Drama Therapy (3 credits)
Prerequisite: DTHY 644.
This course explores assessment tools developed in the field of drama therapy, including those based on such dramatic media as storytelling, role-plays, puppets and masks. The theory and practice of drama therapy assessment in both clinical work and research are reviewed within the context of different populations.
DTHY 693 Research in Drama Therapy (3 credits)
Prerequisite: CATS 691.
This course is designed to foster the acquisition of knowledge and methodological tools in arts-based, qualitative and quantitative methods relevant to the field of drama therapy. Emphasis is placed on the use of the practical tools necessary to conduct reliable and valid research.
MTHY 623 and MTHY 699 (Thesis, 15 credits).
Three additional elective credits, to be chosen in consultation with an academic faculty advisor, from: MTHY 624 and MTHY 625.
Advanced music therapy practice option:
MTHY 633 (6 credits), MTHY 634 (6 credits).
Plus nine additional elective credits, to be chosen in consultation with an academic faculty advisor. With the approval of the Chair of  Creative Arts Therapies and of the cooperating department, some or all of the elective credits may be chosen from the Department of Creative Arts Therapies, other departments in the University, or other universities.
French Language Requirements. While there are no formal French proficiency requirements, students intending to work in Québec are strongly encouraged to develop a working knowledge of French.
Academic Regulations
Academic Standing. Please refer to the Academic Standing section of the Calendar for a detailed review of the Academic Regulations.
Residence. The minimum required residency is three consecutive terms full-time study or the equivalent in part-time study.
Time Limit. Please refer to the Academic Regulation page for further details regarding the Time Limit requirements. It is expected that students will normally complete the proposed program within 3 terms (1 year) of full-time study from the time of initial registration in the program.
Graduation Requirement. In order to graduate, students must have a minimum cumulative GPA of 2.70.
Courses
CATS 609 Introduction to Dance/Movement Therapy (3 credits)
This course provides an introduction to the foundations and primary concepts of dance/movement therapy and explores their relevance and applications to other creative arts therapies modalities through experiential, somatic, and theoretical approaches.
CATS 610 Introduction to Topics in Clinical Psychology for Creative Arts Therapists (3 credits)
This seminar introduces creative arts therapists to the various psychopathologies, their symptomatologies, etiologies, current Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM) diagnostic criteria, and treatments.
Note: Credit received for CATS 610 cannot be applied towards a graduate program in Psychology.
CATS 611 Counselling Skills for Creative Arts Therapists (3 credits)
This course introduces basic skills and practices of counselling and psychotherapy for creative arts therapists. It provides the opportunity to explore, develop, and practice the skills required for effective therapeutic interventions across varied theoretical orientations and treatment approaches. The course focuses on the therapeutic relationship and the therapeutic frame.
CATS 615 Independent Practicum in the Creative Arts Therapies (3 credits)
Prerequisites: ATRP 613, 614.
With the Department’s approval and in agreement with a faculty supervisor, additional practicum experience is offered on an individual basis to students in special circumstances. A case study is required.
CATS 631A Selected Issues in the Creative Arts Therapies (3 credits)
This course may be repeated as CATS 631B, 631C, etc.
CATS 636 Independent Studies in Creative Arts Therapies (3 credits)
This course may be repeated as CATS 637.
CATS 638 Creative Process in Clinical Practice for Creative Arts Therapists (3 credits)
This course provides experiential learning in the clinical application of creative projection techniques through a methodology based on exploring character in myth and fairy tale. The creative process is examined through readings, discussions, masks, movement, music and drama.
CATS 639 Interdisciplinary Topics: Cross-cultural Competence in the Creative Arts Therapies (1 credit)
This course presents cross-cultural competence as an ethical obligation, providing an overview of multi-cultural counselling theory. Students explore challenges and opportunities arising in creative arts therapies clinical practice within an environment of cultural diversity as it relates to both the therapist and the client.
CATS 640 Studio Media and Practice for Creative Arts Therapists (3 credits)
Students develop skills with a variety of studio media and processes in their own creative arts discipline, while experiencing the media and creative process of an allied discipline. Commonalities and factors unique to each are examined for their potential in interdisciplinary practice.
CATS 641 Interdisciplinary Topics: Ethics in Clinical Practice in the Creative Arts Therapies (1 credit)
This course covers ethical standards and requirements for clinical practice as established by both professional mental health and creative arts therapies associations. Students become familiar with expectations of professional and personal conduct as well as models for ethical decision-making. Students also gain an understanding of their personal value systems in relation to their work as creative arts therapists and how those values may inform ethical decision-making within their clinical practice.
CATS 643 Interdisciplinary Topics: Ethics in Research in the Creative Arts Therapies (1 credit)
This course covers ethical standards and requirements for research as established by both professional mental health and creative arts therapies associations. Students become familiar with expectations of professional and personal conduct with respect to research in the field, including research protocols for both the Department of Creative Arts Therapies and Concordia University.
CATS 645 Family Systems and the Creative Arts Therapies (3 credits)
Family systems theory is introduced and specific theories and practices of family therapy are considered. Indications for the use of family therapy and its integration with the creative arts therapies are explored, as are specific methods of assessment and intervention.
CATS 689 Research Paper (9 credits)
Prerequisite: CATS 691.
The research paper is the formal culmination of graduate studies in the creative arts therapies. This paper includes a literature review, and may also include methodology, specific procedures, research population or sample, data collection and analysis, as appropriate to the topic approved by the Creative Arts Therapies Research and Ethics Committee. Students develop their proposals for this paper as a course requirement for CATS 691, to be submitted for approval to the Research and Ethics Committee in the winter term of their first year in the program. The Committee will then assign one faculty member in the Department to supervise each paper. The nine-credit component appears on the student record only once the final version of the research paper has been submitted to the Thesis Office and the Graduate Grade Activity Report Form, granting a grade of PASS, has been submitted to the Office of the Registrar.
CATS 691 Research in the Creative Arts Therapies (3 credits)
This course presents an overview of qualitative research, theory and methodology, and their application to the creative arts therapies. Students develop critical reading skills and explore ethical issues involved in research.
CATS 698 Applied Research Project with Report (6 credits)
The student chooses this option to further explore specific pilot project reports, feasibility studies and creative research designs utilizing media intrinsic to the creative arts therapies. All applied projects must include a written component and be presented as a public seminar upon completion.
CATS 699 Comprehensive Exam (3 credits)
Music Therapy Option Courses
MTHY 600 Music Therapy Advanced Literature (3 credits)
In this course, students examine music therapy and related literature in order to deepen their understanding of the influences on their own clinical and conceptual work. Cultural, musical, and theoretical frameworks are analyzed; these include psychodynamic, humanistic, cognitive behavioural, and other frameworks. Emphasis is placed on the integration of theory and music therapy process, assessment, intervention, and evidence-based practice.
MTHY 601 Music Therapy Supervision, Teaching, and Learning (3 credits)
Examination of current theories and practices in clinical music therapy supervision and in university teaching and learning. Through lectures, demonstrations, and applied practice, students develop the necessary advanced professional competencies for clinical supervision and for excellence in teaching and learning. Topics include, but are not limited to, learning styles, teaching strategies, infusion of technology in instruction, and the creation of effective learning communities.
MTHY 602 Advanced Clinical Improvisation in Music Therapy I (1.5 credits)
This course explores the applications of clinical improvisation processes in therapy and assessment. The specific focus is determined by identified student strengths and needs, and may include Nordoff and Robbins techniques; advanced piano techniques; analytical music therapy; and others.
MTHY 603 Advanced Clinical Improvisation in Music Therapy II (1.5 credits)
Prerequisite: MTHY 602, or equivalent.
Advanced study in clinical improvisation techniques in music therapy. The specific focus is determined by the identified student experience, strengths, and needs, and may include Nordoff and Robbins techniques; advanced piano and vocal techniques; analytical music therapy; and others.
MTHY 623 Advanced Music Therapy Practicum I (3 credits)
This course offers advanced clinical experience in the students’ areas of specialization. Close individual and group supervision for students are provided. Case presentations, readings, discussion of ethical issues related to students’ work are integral to this course.
MTHY 624 Advanced Music Therapy Practicum II (3 credits)
Prerequisite: MTHY 623.
This course provides further advanced clinical experience in students’ areas of specialization. Close individual and group supervision for students are provided. Case presentations, readings, discussion of ethical issues related to students’ work are integral to this course.
MTHY 625 Guided Imagery and Music, Level I (3 credits)
This course introduces students to the Guided Imagery and Music method (GIM) through demonstrations, theoretical discussion and personal experiences. Specific topics covered include: the role of music in GIM, relaxation techniques, types of imagery and basic guiding techniques, and the implementation of GIM in assessment. This course is graded on a Pass/Fail basis.
MTHY 633 Advanced Music Therapy Practice I (6 credits)
This course offers advanced clinical experience in the students’ areas of specialization, with a required minimum of 100 placement hours. Close individual and group supervision for students are provided. Case presentations, readings, discussion of ethical issues related to students’ work are integral to this course.
MTHY 634 Advanced Music Therapy Practice II (6 credits)
Prerequisite: MTHY 633.
This course provides further advanced clinical experience in students’ areas of specialization, with a required minimum of 100 placement hours. Close individual and group supervision for students are provided. Case presentations, readings, discussion of ethical issues related to students’ work are integral to this course. As part of this capstone course in the Advanced Music Therapy Practice option, students complete a public presentation which reflects a major integration of their practical work.
MTHY 693 Research in Music Therapy: Qualitative and Quantitative Methods (3 credits)
This course is designed to foster the acquisition of knowledge and methodological tools in qualitative and quantitative methods relevant to the field of Music Therapy. Particular emphasis is placed on acquisition of the practical tools necessary to conduct reliable and valid research to prepare students for the development of future research papers/projects in Music Therapy.
MTHY 699 Thesis (15 credits)
Prerequisite: CATS 691 and MTHY 693.
The thesis topic is chosen in consultation with the thesis supervisor, and is approved by the thesis advisory committee. Students conduct an inquiry, produce the thesis, and present it orally to their thesis advisory committee. Guidelines for the thesis are described in Thesis Preparation and Thesis Examination Regulations available from the School of Graduate Studies and the Research Handbook of the Creative Arts Therapies Department.
MTHY 501 Music Therapy Skills (3 credits)
This course introduces students to basic materials, methods, and skills used to engage people in music therapy. These include improvisation, performance, leadership, group management, and appropriate repertoire/materials development for various ages and populations. Participation in varied experiences include, but are not limited to, vocal and instrumental improvisation, drumming circles, movement, melodic instruments, assistive technology, integrated arts, and songwriting
MTHY 502 Psychology of Music (2 credits)
This course provides an introduction to phenomena involving music and human behaviour, including physical, acoustical, perceptual, psychological, neuropsychological, and pedagogical aspects.
MTHY 503 Music Therapy with Adults (1 credit)
This course provides in depth coverage of music therapy clinical practice with diverse adult populations. This includes assessment techniques, intervention methods and strategies, improvisation, counselling skills, and an overview of the various populations.
MTHY 504 Music Therapy with Children and Adolescents (1 credit)
This course provides in depth coverage of music therapy clinical practice with diverse child and adolescent populations. This includes assessment techniques, intervention methods and strategies, improvisation, and an overview of the various populations.
MTHY 510 Music Therapy Practicum I (3 credits)
Co-requisite: MTHY 503.
This practicum course with adults is one in a series of practica that cumulatively fulfills the requirements of the 200-hour preclinical and the 1,000-hour supervised clinical internship requirements, as stipulated by the professional program approval associations (the Canadian Association for Music Therapy and the American Music Therapy Association). Students develop as professional music therapists within a social, political and cultural context. Students acquire skills in the implementation of the principles and practices of music therapy within adult populations, including observation and assessment procedures, treatment planning, evaluation, and reporting in multi-disciplinary team settings. Students have the opportunity to explore, develop, and integrate academic and practical knowledge and skills within a clinical setting. A minimum of 300 practicum hours is required.
MTHY 511 Music Therapy Practicum II (3 credits)
Co-requisite: MTHY 504.
This practicum course within children and adolescent populations is one in a series of practica that cumulatively fulfills the requirements of the 200-hour pre-clinical and the 1,000-hour supervised clinical internship requirements, as stipulated by the professional program approval associations (the Canadian Association for Music Therapy and the American Music Therapy Association). Students develop as professional music therapists within a social, political and cultural context. Students acquire skills in the implementation of the principles and practices of music therapy within child and adolescent populations, including observation and assessment procedures, treatment planning, evaluation, and reporting in multi-disciplinary team settings. Students have the opportunity to explore, develop, and integrate academic and practical knowledge and skills within a clinical setting. A minimum of 300 practicum hours is required.
MTHY 512 Music Therapy Practicum III (9 credits)
Prerequisites: MTHY 510 and MTHY 511.
This practicum course with diverse populations is the final in a series of practica that cumulatively fulfills the requirements of the 200-hour preclinical and the 1,000-hour supervised clinical internship requirements, as stipulated by the professional program approval associations (the Canadian Association for Music Therapy and the American Music Therapy Association). Students develop as professional music therapists within a social, political and cultural context. With a greater focus on clinical work in this practicum, students have the opportunity to specialize in a clinical population of their choice, preparing for future careers and/or graduate studies in music therapy. A minimum of 600 practicum hours is required. Students are also required to attend classes which may be offered as weekend intensives.
MTHY 521 Clinical Improvisation in Music Therapy (3 credits)
This course explores the basic applications of clinical improvisation processes in therapy and assessment. The specific focus is determined by identified student strengths and needs, and may include Nordoff and Robbins techniques, advanced piano techniques, analytical music therapy, and others.
FMST 806 Proseminar I (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Enrolment in Film and Moving Image Studies; or written permission of the Mel Hoppenheim School of Cinema.
Proseminar I is designed to give students a broad introduction to advanced film and moving image research by putting different periods, research methodologies, theories, and genres into dynamic relation. Written assignments are required as well as an oral presentation.
Note: Students who have received credit for FMST 800 may not take this course for credit.
FMST 807 Proseminar II (3 credits)
Prerequisite: FMST 806; or written permission of the Mel Hoppenheim School of Cinema.
Proseminar II is designed to give students a broad introduction to advanced film and moving image research by putting different periods, research methodologies, theories,and genres into dynamic relation. Written assignments are required as well as an oral presentation.
Note: Students who have received credit for FMST 800 may not take this course for credit.
Cluster Courses (Topics Clusters):
The specific content of the seminars in each of the four topics clusters will be decided by the doctoral program joint committee on a yearly basis, based on course proposals made by accredited faculty.
Cluster A:
FMST 801 Seminar in Film and Moving Image History (3 credits)
Advanced study and research in problems and issues related to film and moving image history and historiography. Topics for seminars in this cluster may include: Methods in Film Historiography; Methodological Aspects of Film-Archival Research; History of Film Technology; History of Film Institutions; History of Pre-Cinema and Early Cinema; History of Silent Cinema; History of Film Movements; History of Documentary Film; History of New Media.
Cluster B:
FMST 802 Seminar in Film and Moving Image Aesthetics (3 credits)
Advanced study and research in problems and issues of film aesthetics. Students examine the style associated with certain films, directors, genres, and national cinemas, or investigate film criticism and taste cultures. Topics for seminars in this cluster may include: Topics in Film Style and Form; Topics in Film Criticism; Film and the Other Arts: Topics in Aesthetic Theory; Topics in Directors; Topics in Moving Image and New Media Art: New Media Aesthetics; Performance.
Cluster C:
FMST 803 Seminar in Film and Moving Image Theory (3 credits)
Seminars in this cluster offer an in-depth investigation of a theory or a theoretical tradition in Film and Moving Image Studies. The course may focus on the work of a single theorist, or a particular approach or methodology. Topics for seminars in this cluster include: Interpretation and Hermeneutics; Reception Theory Narrative Theory; Topics in Classical Film Theory; Topics in Contemporary Film Theory; Topics in Film and Philosophy; Psychoanalysis and Film; Genre Theory; Semiotics; Topics in Cognitive Theory; Textual Analysis.
Cluster D:
FMST 804 Seminar in Film, Moving Image and Cultural Theory (3 credits)
Seminars in this cluster investigate film and the moving image from social and cultural perspectives. Topics for seminars in this cluster may include: Cinema and Modernity; Postmodernity and Globalization; Film, New Media, and Visual Culture, Queer Theory; Feminist Theory; Post-colonial Theory; Topics in Social and Political Theory; Topics in Cultural Studies, Film in the Context of Television and Consumer Culture.
Elective Courses (Joint MA/PhD seminars):
Students take a maximum of six credits of elective coursework. Students are entitled to enrol in PhD seminars that are cross-listed with MA seminars, provided they do not repeat seminars taken at Concordia during their MA degree. (Doctoral students registered in these courses will be expected to perform at PhD level).
Note: The focus of any given topics course in a given year determines the cluster to which it belongs. For example, “Topics in Cinéma Québécois” may belong to Cluster A when the focus is on historiography or it may belong to Cluster B when the course centers on aesthetic issues in Quebec cinema.
FMST 805/FMST 605 Topics in English Canadian Cinema (3 credits)
This seminar explores the spectrum of Canadian cinema and video produced in English, and features screenings of historical and contemporary works within fiction, documentary and experimental areas, and in some instances, video and television as well. The culture, political and institutional contexts of production and reception are emphasized, with textural analysis at the core.
Note: Students who have received credit for a topic in FMST 605 may not take that same topic under FMST 805 for credit.
FMST 810/FMST 610 Topics in Cinema Québécois (3 credits)
The course explores Québécois cinema culture. Emphasis is placed on the cultural and political contexts of production and reception. Topics may include the structure of the film industry in Québec, the role of the NFB and other institutions, avenues of distribution and exhibition, also particular groups of films, such as cinema direct, or on specific time periods, or the work of specific filmmakers.
Note: Students who have received credit for a topic in FMST 610 may not take that same topic under FMST 810 for credit.
FMST 815/FMST 615 Topics in European Cinema (3 credits)
This course covers topics in Russian, German, French, Italian, British, Spanish and Eastern European Cinemas. Questions of national culture, patterns of film production, distribution and reception, and aesthetic histories are covered. The course incorporates future experimental and documentary films as well as readings in specific cultural histories.
Note: Students who have received credit for a topic in FMST 615 may not take that same topic under FMST 815 for credit.
FMST 820/FMST 620 Topics in Non-European Cinema (3 credits)
This course focuses on Asian, African and South American filmmaking, film cultures and film industries, and comparative studies of issues pertinent to more than one of these cultures.
Note: Students who have received credit for a topic in FMST 620 may not take that same topic under FMST 820 for credit.
FMST 825/FMST 625 Topics in Film History (3 credits)
This course explores specific problems and methods of film historiography, and examines the practices associated with one or more of these methods. Course topics emphasize various historiographic methods and theories, problems of methodology and analysis.
Note: Students who have received credit for a topic in FMST 625 may not take that same topic under FMST 825 for credit.
FMST 830/FMST 630 Topics in Film Theory (3 credits)
This course is devoted to close readings of key tests in film theory, examining their background, intellectual histories, and analyzing their significance. Topics may concentrate on historical developments in film theory, or they may address a given method or approach.
Note: Students who have received credit for a topic in FMST 630 may not take that same topic under FMST 830 for credit.
FMST 835/FMST 635 Topics in Aesthetics and Cultural Theory (3 credits)
This course examines the broader cultural and aesthetic histories relevant to film theory and practice. These theories are studied in depth, beyond the limits of film studies, in order to situate film history and theory within other interdisciplinary perspectives. Topics may include postmodernism, modernism, philosophical aesthetics, sexual representation, Frankfurt School theory, postcolonialism, Marxism, deconstruction, and psychoanalysis.
Note: Students who have received credit for a topic in FMST 635 may not take that same topic under FMST 835 for credit.
FMST 840/FMST 640 Gender Issues in Film (3 credits)
This course provides an opportunity to contextualize a range of historical and theoretical feminist positions, and women’s film practices. Sample course topics include pornography, experimental feminist praxis, gender and race, or constructions of gender in specific historical periods or countries.
Note: Students who have received credit for a topic in FMST 640 may not take that same topic under FMST 840 for credit.
FMST 845/FMST 645 Topics in Film Genres (3 credits)
This course explores specific narrative film genres, such as the musical, the western, comedy, horror, melodrama and film noir. In each case, the history of the genre and its socio-historical dimensions is explored. Questions of genre transformation, popular mythology, cultural sources and parallel media, institutional analysis (studio practices) and spectatorship are addressed.
Note: Students who have received credit for a topic in FMST 645 may not take that same topic under FMST 845 for credit.
FMST 850/FMST 650 Topics in Experimental Film and Video (3 credits)
This course examines the history, aesthetics, theory and practice of experimental/avant-garde film and video, and may be organized around specific bodies of work, or theoretical issues such as the politics of representation, pure cinema, poetic structures, reflexivity, or documentary representation. Questions of medium specificity, modernism/postmodernism, performance art and theory, exhibition, distribution, canonization and criticism are addressed.
Note: Students who have received credit for a topic in FMST 650 may not take that same topic under FMST 850 for credit.
FMST 855 (PhD)/FMST 655 (MA) Topics in Documentary (3 credits)
Documentary history, aesthetics and theory are addressed in this course Questions of ideology, narrative and style in the context of specific groups of films are studied. Topics may relate to specific countries, histories, methods, institutions and cultural issues and methodological and theoretical problems arising from the concomitant evolution of television journalism, rapidly evolving technology, and changing patterns of exhibition and reception are examined.
Note: Students who have received credit for a topic in FMST 655 may not take that same topic under FMST 855 for credit.
FMST 860 (PhD)/FMST 660 Topics in Film Directors (3 credits)
This course examines the work of one or more specific directors from stylistic, aesthetic, cultural and historical perspectives. Directors that may be studied include Welles, Dreyer, Eisenstein, Hitchcock, Lang, Pasolini, Godard, Von Sternberg, Akermann and Arzmer, have been the foundation of extensive film studies scholarship.
Note: Students who have received credit for a topic in FMST 660 may not take that same topic under FMST 860 for credit.
FMST 865/FMST 665 Topics in Film Studies (3 credits)
From time to time, courses in topics that do not fit into any of the topics courses listed above are offered. These courses may include technical studies such as film acting, or special topics related to an instructor’s research project.
Note: Students who have received credit for a topic in FMST 665 may not take that same topic under FMST 865 for credit.
Other elective courses
FMST 870 Independent Study (3 credits)
Independent Study courses offer students opportunities to research and write about particular topics in film studies that are not covered in the courses offered in a given year. Students must propose a topic to a full-time faculty member, under whose supervision they complete the course.
FMST 880 Research Seminar (3 credits)
Film Studies faculty in the School of Cinema may organize seminars on a current research project.
Other program activities
FMST 885 Thesis Proposal (6 credits)
Once the examinations are completed students are eligible to submit their thesis proposal (it must be submitted no later than the second week of September or the third year into the program). The thesis proposal consists of a 40 to 60 page document outlining the object of study of the thesis, its objectives, the research hypothesis and the methodology that will be used or developed. A detailed bibliography will accompany the document as well as a preliminary table of contents. The thesis proposal must be defended orally before a jury consisting of the student’s supervisor and two faculty members.
FMST 887 Comprehensive Exam (3 credits)
A written comprehensive examination pertains to the candidate’s major field of research. A reading list of approximately 50 books and essays along with an appropriate and relevant filmography will be prepared by the student with the assistance of his/her supervisor.
FMST 888 Specialization Examination Essay (3 credits)
This course functions as a written case study that demonstrates the candidate’s capacity to perform critical analysis of research material and address research questions as outlined in the thesis proposal.
FMST 890 Research and Thesis (60 credits)
A major portion of the doctoral program is the planning and execution of innovative and original research under the direction of a supervisor. The doctoral thesis defence will be an oral examination conducted by a chair who shall be the Dean of Graduate Studies or a delegate.
FMST 600 Methods in Film Studies (6 credits)
FMST 605 Topics in English Canadian Cinema (3 credits)
Cross-listed: FMST 805.
This seminar explores the spectrum of Canadian cinema and video produced in English, and features screenings of historical and contemporary works within fiction, documentary and experimental areas, and in some instances, video and television as well. The culture, political and institutional contexts of production and reception are emphasized, with textural analysis at the core.
Note: Students who have received credit for a topic in FMST 605 may not take that same topic under FMST 805 for credit.
FMST 610 Topics in Cinema Québécois (3 credits)
Cross-listed: FMST 810.
The course explores Québécois cinema culture. Emphasis is placed on the cultural and political contexts of production and reception. Topics may include the structure of the film industry in Québec, the role of the NFB and other institutions, avenues of distribution and exhibition, also particular groups of films, such as cinema direct, or on specific time periods, or the work of specific filmmakers.
Note: Students who have received credit for a topic in FMST 610 may not take that same topic under FMST 810 for credit.
FMST 615 Topics in European Cinema (3 credits)
Cross-listed: FMST 815.
This course covers topics in Russian, German, French, Italian, British, Spanish and Eastern European Cinemas. Questions of national culture, patterns of film production, distribution and reception, and aesthetic histories are covered. The course incorporates future experimental and documentary films as well as readings in specific cultural histories.
Note: Students who have received credit for a topic in FMST 615 may not take that same topic under FMST 815 for credit.
FMST 620 Topics in Non-European Cinema (3 credits)
Cross-listed: FMST 820.
This course focuses on Asian, African and South American filmmaking, film cultures and film industries, and comparative studies of issues pertinent to more than one of these cultures.
Note: Students who have received credit for a topic in FMST 620 may not take that same topic under FMST 820 for credit.
FMST 625 Topics in Film History (3 credits)
Cross-listed: FMST 825.
This course explores specific problems and methods of film historiography, and examines the practices associated with one or more of these methods. Course topics emphasize various historiographic methods and theories, problems of methodology and analysis.
Note: Students who have received credit for a topic in FMST 625 may not take that same topic under FMST 825 for credit.
FMST 630 Topics in Film Theory (3 credits)
Cross-listed: FMST 830.
This course is devoted to close readings of key tests in film theory, examining their background, intellectual histories, and analyzing their significance. Topics may concentrate on historical developments in film theory, or they may address a given method or approach.
Note: Students who have received credit for a topic in FMST 630 may not take that same topic under FMST 830 for credit.
FMST 635 Topics in Aesthetics and Cultural Theory (3 credits)
Cross-listed: FMST 835.
This course examines the broader cultural and aesthetic histories relevant to film theory and practice. These theories are studied in depth, beyond the limits of film studies, in order to situate film history and theory within other interdisciplinary perspectives. Topics may include postmodernism, modernism, philosophical aesthetics, sexual representation, Frankfurt School theory, postcolonialism, Marxism, deconstruction, and psychoanalysis.
Note: Students who have received credit for a topic in FMST 635 may not take that same topic under FMST 835 for credit.
FMST 640 Gender Issues in Film (3 credits)
Cross-listed: FMST 840.
This course provides an opportunity to contextualize a range of historical and theoretical feminist positions, and women’s film practices. Sample course topics include pornography, experimental feminist praxis, gender and race, or constructions of gender in specific historical periods or countries.
Note: Students who have received credit for a topic in FMST 640 may not take that same topic under FMST 840 for credit.
FMST 645 Topics in Film Genres (3 credits)
Cross-listed: FMST 845.
This course explores specific narrative film genres, such as the musical, the western, comedy, horror, melodrama and film noir. In each case, the history of the genre and its socio-historical dimensions is explored. Questions of genre transformation, popular mythology, cultural sources and parallel media, institutional analysis (studio practices) and spectatorship are addressed.
Note: Students who have received credit for a topic in FMST 645 may not take that same topic under FMST 845 for credit.
FMST 650 Topics in Experimental Film and Video (3 credits)
Cross-listed: FMST 850.
This course examines the history, aesthetics, theory and practice of experimental/avant-garde film and video, and may be organized around specific bodies of work, or theoretical issues such as the politics of representation, pure cinema, poetic structures, reflexivity, or documentary representation. Questions of medium specificity, modernism/postmodernism, performance art and theory, exhibition, distribution, canonization and criticism are addressed.
Note: Students who have received credit for a topic in FMST 650 may not take that same topic under FMST 850 for credit.
FMST 655 Topics in Documentary (MA) (3 credits)
Cross-listed: FMST 855.
Documentary history, aesthetics and theory are addressed in this course Questions of ideology, narrative and style in the context of specific groups of films are studied. Topics may relate to specific countries, histories, methods, institutions and cultural issues and methodological and theoretical problems arising from the concomitant evolution of television journalism, rapidly evolving technology, and changing patterns of exhibition and reception are examined.
Note: Students who have received credit for a topic in FMST 655 may not take that same topic under FMST 855 for credit.
FMST 660 Topics in Film Directors (3 credits)
Cross-listed: FMST 860.
This course examines the work of one or more specific directors from stylistic, aesthetic, cultural and historical perspectives. Directors that may be studied include Welles, Dreyer, Eisenstein, Hitchcock, Lang, Pasolini, Godard, Von Sternberg, Akermann and Arzmer, have been the foundation of extensive film studies scholarship.
Note: Students who have received credit for a topic in FMST 660 may not take that same topic under FMST 860 for credit.
FMST 665 Topics in Film Studies (3 credits)
Cross-listed: FMST 865.
From time to time, courses in topics that do not fit into any of the topics courses listed above are offered. These courses may include technical studies such as film acting, or special topics related to an instructor’s research project.
Note: Students who have received credit for a topic in FMST 665 may not take that same topic under FMST 865 for credit.
FMST 670 Independent Study (3 credits)
FMST 675 Practicum (3 credits)
FMST 680 Practicum (3 credits)
FMST 685 Practicum (6 credits)
FMST 690 MA Research and Thesis (27 credits)
CERA 610 Ceramics I (6 credits)
A studio course providing an opportunity for intense investigation into a broad range of issues in ceramics and other disciplines. Under the supervision of a professor the structure of the course allows each participant to pursue independent interests.
CERA 611 Ceramics II (6 credits)
A continuation of CERA 610.
CERA 612 Ceramics III (6 credits)
A continuation of CERA 611.
CERA 613 Ceramics IV (6 credits)
A continuation of CERA 612.
FMPR 610 Film Production I (6 credits)
A studio course providing an opportunity to do advanced work in aesthetic and technical aspects of filmmaking with an emphasis on independent production.
FMPR 611 Film Production II (6 credits)
A continuation of FMPR 610.
FMPR 612 Film Production III (6 credits)
A continuation of FMPR 611.
FMPR 613 Film Production IV (6 credits)
A continuation of FMPR 612.
FBRS 610 Fibres and Material Practices I (6 credits)
A studio course providing an opportunity for intense investigation in fibres and material practices as well as other disciplines. Under the supervision of a professor, the structure of the course allows each student to pursue independent interests.
FBRS 611 Fibres and Material Practices II (6 credits)
A continuation of FBRS 610.
FBRS 612 Fibres and Material Practices III (6 credits)
A continuation of FBRS 611.
FBRS 613 Fibres and Material Practices IV (6 credits)
A continuation of FBRS 612.
IMCA 610 Intermedia (Video, Performance and Electronic Arts) I (6 credits)
A studio course providing an opportunity for intense investigation in video, performance and electronic arts, as well as other disciplines. Under the supervision of a faculty member, the structure of the course allows each participant to pursue independent studio practice.
Note: Students who have received credit for OPME 610 may not take this course for credit.
IMCA 611 Intermedia (Video, Performance and Electronic Arts) II (6 credits)
A continuation of IMCA 610.
Note: Students who have received credit for OPME 611 may not take this course for credit.
IMCA 612 Intermedia (Video, Performance and Electronic Arts) III (6 credits)
A continuation of IMCA 611.
Note: Students who have received credit for OPME 612 may not take this course for credit.
IMCA 613 Intermedia (Video, Performance and Electronic Arts) IV (6 credits)
A continuation of IMCA 612.
Note: Students who have received credit for OPME 613 may not take this course for credit.
PTNG 610 Painting I (6 credits)
A studio course providing opportunity for intense investigation into a wide range of approaches to painting. Under the supervision of a professor the structure of the course allows each student to pursue individual interests in painting.
PTNG 611 Painting II (6 credits)
A continuation of PTNG 610.
PTNG 612 Painting III (6 credits)
A continuation of PTNG 611.
PTNG 613 Painting IV (6 credits)
A continuation of PTNG 612.
PHOT 610 Photography I (6 credits)
A studio course providing investigation into a broadly defined concept of photography. Under the supervision of a professor each student pursues independent studio practice.
PHOT 611 Photography II (6 credits)
A continuation of PHOT 610.
PHOT 612 Photography III (6 credits)
A continuation of PHOT 611.
PHOT 613 Photography IV (6 credits)
A continuation of PHOT 612.
PRIN 610 Print Media I (6 credits)
A studio course providing intense investigation of the technical and theoretical concerns of diverse forms of print media. Under the supervision of a professor, each student pursues independent studio practice.
PRIN 611 Print Media II (6 credits)
A continuation of PRIN 610.
PRIN 612 Print Media III (6 credits)
A continuation of PRIN 611.
PRIN 613 Print Media IV (6 credits)
A continuation of PRIN 612.
SCUL 610 Sculpture I (6 credits)
A studio course offering the opportunity for intense investigation into the formation of visual and material culture in art. Under the supervision of a professor each student may pursue independent studio practice.
SCUL 611 Sculpture II (6 credits)
A continuation of SCUL 610.
SCUL 612 Sculpture III (6 credits)
A continuation of SCUL 611.
SCUL 613 Sculpture IV (6 credits)
A continuation of SCUL 612.
DISP 615 Directed Studio Practice (3 credits)
Under the guidance of an instructor, students will pursue a directed studio practice.
Seminars
ASEM 620 Art: Ideas and Practices (3 credits)
This seminar addresses the relationship between theory and studio practice. Professional and practical issues facing the artist will be discussed.
ASEM 641 Seminar in Contemporary Art (6 credits)
This course addresses issues which situate and inform artists and their work.
ASEM 642 Seminar in Contemporary Art (3 credits)
This course addresses issues which situate and inform artists and their work.
ASEM 643 Special Topics in Art and Ideology (6 credits)
Special topics will address a variety of issues that are factors in the making, presentation and the situating of art in society.
ASEM 644 Special Topics In Art and Ideology (3 credits)
Special topics will address a variety of issues that are factors in the making, presentation and the situating of art in society.
ASEM 645 Special Topics in Art and Culture (6 credits)
Topics are drawn from a variety of discourses to address the construction of identity in contemporary art and society.
ASEM 646 Special Topics in Art and Culture (3 credits)
Topics are drawn from a variety of discourses to address the construction of identity in contemporary art and society.
ASEM 651 Special Topics in Media Arts (6 credits)
Topics may address a wide range of critical fields related to media art practices, examining both conventional and non-traditional artworks such as performance, audio, video, and computer art, as well as other media.
ASEM 652 Special Topics in Media Arts (3 credits)
Topics may address a wide range of critical fields related to media art practices, examining both conventional and non-traditional artworks such as performance, audio, video, and computer art, as well as other media.
ASEM 653 Aspects of Contemporary Cinema (6 credits)
This seminar examines critical issues in contemporary cinema.
ASEM 654 Aspects of Contemporary Cinema (3 credits)
This seminar examines critical issues in contemporary cinema.
Internship and Independent Study
INTP 660 Professional Internship (6 credits)
Prerequisite: 21 credits completed in the MFA Program. Internship proposal must be supported by a full-time faculty member and approved with written permission by the MFA Graduate Program Director.
Under the joint supervision of a qualified professional and a full-time faculty member the student will be employed within industry, or by a professional organization or other relevant affiliation. Assessment is based upon a required paper, contributions to supervisory sessions and the successful completion of the internship (300 hours).
INTP 661 Professional Internship I (3 credits)
Prerequisite: 21 credits completed in the MFA Program. Internship proposal must be supported by a full-time faculty member and approved with written permission by the MFA Graduate Program Director.
Under the joint supervision of a qualified professional and a full-time faculty member the student will be employed within industry, or by a professional organization or other relevant affiliation. Assessment is based upon a required paper, contributions to supervisory sessions and the successful completion of the internship (150 hours).
INTP 662 Professional Internship II (3 credits)
Prerequisite: 21 credits completed in the MFA Program. Internship proposal must be supported by a full-time faculty member and approved with written permission by the MFA Graduate Program Director.
Under the joint supervision of a qualified professional and a full-time faculty member the student will be employed within industry, or by a professional organization or other relevant affiliation. Assessment is based upon a required paper, contributions to supervisory sessions and the successful completion of the internship (150 hours).
INDS 670 Independent Study (6 credits)
Prerequisite: 21 credits completed in the MFA Program. Independent study proposal must be supported by a full-time faculty supervisor and approved with written permission by the MFA Graduate Program Director.
The student explores a specific field or topic relevant to their area of study.
INDS 671 Independent Study I (3 credits)
Prerequisite: 21 credits completed in the MFA Program. Independent study proposal must be supported by a full-time faculty supervisor and approved with written permission by the MFA Graduate Program Director.
The student explores a specific field or topic relevant to their area of study.
INDS 672 Independent Study II (3 credits)
Prerequisite: 21 credits completed in the MFA Program. Independent study proposal must be supported by a full-time faculty supervisor and approved with written permission by the MFA Graduate Program Director.
The student explores a specific field or topic relevant to their area of study.
Studio Project and Examination
PROJ 691 Studio Project (9 credits)
With the guidance of a faculty advisor, students prepare work leading to an exhibition or film project.
PROJ 692 Exhibition or Film Project (3 credits)
Following the successful completion of the Studio Project, the student prepares a professional-level presentation within a public forum (gallery, screening room, etc.) accompanied by an artist’s statement. The candidate meets with an Examination Committee to describe the evolution of the work and to situate it in the context of current practice and theory. The Committee will question the student and determine whether or not to recommend that the student be awarded the MFA degree.
CPTP 501 Connections (3 credits)
Through discussion, readings and papers, students explore ways in which designers and production personnel can participate, collaborate and contribute as full partners in the creation of live performance. Counter-intuitive links are explored in the creation of vibrant and chaotically dynamic works.
CPTP 502 The Art of Proficiency (3 credits)
This seminar focuses on describing the connection between imagination and the production-based realities associated with live performance. Through the analysis of various aspects of production, students look at ways of bridging the gap between inspiration, imagination and originality and their practical application within all aspects of production.
CPTP 503 Aspects of Visual, Aural and Performing Arts (3 credits)
This seminar helps the student develop new perspectives by dealing with the fusion between the student’s present practice and other art forms. Throughout the semester, students meet various practicing artists in their work environment or as guest speakers at the university.
CPTP 511 Practical Study I (3 credits)
Under faculty supervision and based on their previous experience or areas of study, students learn how to apply a large number of creative and practical techniques from a chosen discipline towards achieving a cohesive artistic goal as dictated by current practices in the performing and related live arts. These individual projects must be selected in consultation with the program advisor and approved by the program director.
CPTP 512 Practical Study II (3 credits)
Under faculty supervision and based on their previous experience or areas of study, students expand their language and discourse in the performing arts, focusing on communication and collaboration, while marrying the philosophical and the theoretical with the practical. These individual projects must be selected in consultation with the program advisor and approved by the program director.
CPTP 513 Practical Study III (3 credits)
Under faculty supervision and based on their previous experience or areas of study, this practical study prepares the students both artistically and practically, deepening their insight into the theoretical and practical universes supporting live performance, whether within well-established and traditional artistic disciplines or within innovative and new methods of creation. These individual projects must be selected in consultation with the program advisor and approved by the program director.
CPTP 514 Practical Study IV (3 credits)
Under faculty supervision and based on their previous experience or areas of study, students work alongside professional artists either within the university or in a well-established artistic institution. Students are then given immediate ‘hands on’ access to various aspects of production development, construction and staging processes associated with the most current industry expectation and practice. These individual projects must be selected in consultation with the program advisor and approved by the program director.
CPTP 515 Independent Study (3 credits)
An Independent Study proposal must be supported by a full-time faculty supervisor and approved by and with written permission from the program director (in consultation with the coordinating committee). The student generates a topic to be explored from a specific field relevant to their area of study.
CPTP 598 Special Topics in Creative Practices in Technical Production (3 credits)
Topics may address a wide range of critical fields related to technical production for live performance examining both conventional and non-traditional approaches to dance, music, theatre, as well as other performance or media arts. Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Change in content will be indicated by the letter following the number (i.e. CPTP 598A, CPTP 598B etc.)
AMPS 501 Seminar - Workshop in Performance Skills (3 credits)
(This course may be repeated as AMPS 502)
An intensive developmental course for individual and group performance. A broad range of subjects will be explored including practice methods, effective rehearsing, repertoire research, program-building, memorization, improvisation, and approaching auditions and competitions.
AMPS 503 String Seminar (3 credits)
(This course may be repeated as AMPS 504)
This course examines specific aspects of performance and repertoire studies for stringed instruments.
AMPS 505 Piano Seminar (3 credits)
(This course may be repeated as AMPS 506)
This course examines specific aspects of performance and repertoire studies for piano.
AMPS 507 Voice Seminar (3 credits)
(This course may be repeated as AMPS 508)
This course examines specific aspects of performance and repertoire studies for voice.
AMPS 509 Organ and Harpsichord Seminar (3 credits)
(This course may be repeated as AMPS 510)
This course examines specific aspects of performance and repertoire studies for organ and harpsichord.
AMPS 511 Chamber Ensembles (3 credits)
(This course may be repeated as AMPS 512)
Ensembles work intensively on preparation and presentation of public performances or competitions.
AMPS 513 Orchestra (3 credits)
(This course may be repeated as AMPS 514)
Preparation and public performance with orchestra of one or several works as soloist or principal player.
AMPS 515 Performance Practices (3 credits)
(This course may be repeated as AMPS 516)
Individual projects in particular aspects of performance practice such as basso continuo, ornamentation, the cadenza, contemporary performance techniques, improvisation.
AMPS 517 Special Project in Music (3 credits)
(This course may be repeated as AMPS 518)
Individual projects in music theory, analysis, composition, aesthetics, music history, or inter-disciplinary studies connected with music.
AMPS 519 Recording Production (3 credits)
An audio recording is made in partnership with an advanced recording student. The performer works with an advanced recording student to experiment with various sound recording possibilities, placement and type of microphones, creation of resonance, ambience, “honesty” vs. enhancement, etc. involving several sessions which could include listening to recordings the performer particularly enjoys or dislikes. The advanced recording student is responsible for producing a high-quality digitally edited recording (DAT or CD-R).
AMPS 520 Recital I (6 credits)
AMPS 521 Private Instrumental or Vocal Instruction I (3 credits)
Note: This is a full year course.
AMPS 530 Recital II (6 credits)
AMPS 531 Private Instrumental or Vocal Instruction II (3 credits)
Note: This is a full year course.
AMPS 598 Special Topics in Music Performance Studies (3 credits)
AMPS 599 Special Topics in Music Performance Studies (6 credits)
CPTP 501 Connections (3 credits)
Through discussion, readings and papers, students explore ways in which designers and production personnel can participate, collaborate and contribute as full partners in the creation of live performance. Counter-intuitive links are explored in the creation of vibrant and chaotically dynamic works.
CPTP 502 The Art of Proficiency (3 credits)
This seminar focuses on describing the connection between imagination and the production-based realities associated with live performance. Through the analysis of various aspects of production, students look at ways of bridging the gap between inspiration, imagination and originality and their practical application within all aspects of production.
CPTP 503 Aspects of Visual, Aural and Performing Arts (3 credits)
This seminar helps the student develop new perspectives by dealing with the fusion between the student’s present practice and other art forms. Throughout the semester, students meet various practicing artists in their work environment or as guest speakers at the university.
CPTP 511 Practical Study I (3 credits)
Under faculty supervision and based on their previous experience or areas of study, students learn how to apply a large number of creative and practical techniques from a chosen discipline towards achieving a cohesive artistic goal as dictated by current practices in the performing and related live arts. These individual projects must be selected in consultation with the program advisor and approved by the program director.
CPTP 512 Practical Study II (3 credits)
Under faculty supervision and based on their previous experience or areas of study, students expand their language and discourse in the performing arts, focusing on communication and collaboration, while marrying the philosophical and the theoretical with the practical. These individual projects must be selected in consultation with the program advisor and approved by the program director.
CPTP 513 Practical Study III (3 credits)
Under faculty supervision and based on their previous experience or areas of study, this practical study prepares the students both artistically and practically, deepening their insight into the theoretical and practical universes supporting live performance, whether within well-established and traditional artistic disciplines or within innovative and new methods of creation. These individual projects must be selected in consultation with the program advisor and approved by the program director.
CPTP 514 Practical Study IV (3 credits)
Under faculty supervision and based on their previous experience or areas of study, students work alongside professional artists either within the university or in a well-established artistic institution. Students are then given immediate ‘hands on’ access to various aspects of production development, construction and staging processes associated with the most current industry expectation and practice. These individual projects must be selected in consultation with the program advisor and approved by the program director.
CPTP 515 Independent Study (3 credits)
An Independent Study proposal must be supported by a full-time faculty supervisor and approved by and with written permission from the program director (in consultation with the coordinating committee). The student generates a topic to be explored from a specific field relevant to their area of study.
CPTP 598 Special Topics in Creative Practices in Technical Production (3 credits)
Topics may address a wide range of critical fields related to technical production for live performance examining both conventional and non-traditional approaches to dance, music, theatre, as well as other performance or media arts. Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Change in content will be indicated by the letter following the number (i.e. CPTP 598A, CPTP 598B etc.)
DART 600 Design Theory/Practice I (3 credits)
This seminar develops a framework of practice-based and theoretical approaches that build the foundation of contemporary critical design practice and study. Drawing on examples and readings from a range of disciplines, students will explore design as a product, a practice, and a mode of social communication and investigate the cultural and discursive context in which design resides. The course will integrate the three program streams, namely visual communication, the built environment, and interaction design, and address the theme of sustainability as a timely concern for design practice.
DART 601 Research Methods in Design (3 credits)
This course introduces students to a range of methodologies and strategies used to conduct research in design. Students will be exposed to the relationship that exists between research as a practice-based activity and research as theory-based inquiry and will have the opportunity to engage in the research process through studio work, writing, and presentations.
DART 610 Design Theory/Practice II (3 credits)
Prerequisites: DART 600 and DART 601.
Through a combination of studio work, seminar discussions, workshops, and individual writings, students situate their work in different contexts, such as commercial, public, or domestic environments, and explore new venues for dissemination. Such investigations enhance students’ ability to contextualize, articulate, and exhibit the thesis work.
DART 611 Interdisciplinary Practices in Design (3 credits)
Prerequisites: DART 600 and DART 601.
This seminar examines the question of how knowledge is produced and transferred through interdisciplinary design and scholarly practices. Topics include socio-cultural, environmental and economic sustainability, participatory design, collaborative methods, communities of practice, epistemic cultures, embodiment, and knowledge production. Readings will be drawn from a broad range of disciplines.
DART 620 Graduate Colloquium (3 credits)
Prerequisites: DART 610 and DART 611.
The Graduate Colloquium will foster a community of practice and research by exposing the students to a diversity of work and methods and developing understanding of disciplinary commonalities and differences. Through this colloquium series, presentations by students will be augmented with presentations by faculty, visiting researchers, and practicing designers.
DART 630 Special Topics in Sustainability (3 credits)
Topics may address a range of critical perspectives related to sustainability in terms of the environmental triad of ecological, socio-cultural and economic foci. Sustainable practice can refer to specific technical or scientific fields but also has a broader connotation towards integrative and enduring practices.
DART 631 Special Topics in Visual Communication (3 credits)
Topics may address a range of critical perspectives related to the use of signs, icons, and visual symbols to convey ideas and communicate information. This includes graphic design, typography, illustration, and photography, as well as applications in information design, wayfinding, advertising, packaging, and electronic media.
DART 632 Special Topics in the Built Environment (3 credits)
Topics may address a range of critical perspectives related to the structures, landscapes and spaces, both physical and virtual, in relation to the actions and activities that take place in them over time. This can include large-scale city planning, the design and conceptualization of living and workspaces, and the scale of object that are embedded in those spaces.
DART 633 Special Topics in Interaction Design (3 credits)
Topics may address a range of critical perspectives related to the behaviour of an object or system in relation to its users or participants. Interaction design refers to design practices that embed electronics and computing capabilities into objects, materials, and devices, and it also describes the ways in which systems and processes produce form and structure over time.
DART 634 Special Topics in Contemporary Indigenous Art and Design (3 credits)
Topics may address a range of critical perspectives on contemporary Indigenous art and design in terms of the aesthetic, political, and cultural issues such work illuminates. The course focuses on digital media but may encompass other forms of Indigenous creative practice, including visual arts, performance, and writing.
DART 635 Special Topics in Design Research (3 credits)
Topics may address a range of critical perspectives relevant to the evolution of design research.
DART 651 Directed Study I (3 credits)
Prerequisites: Nine credits completed in the Master of Design program; written permission of any faculty member of the Thesis Advisory Committee and the Graduate Program Director; a cumulative GPA of 3.70 or higher. Students may enrol in a directed study under faculty supervision in order to undertake a specialized study of theoretical or research-creation related topics.
DART 652 Directed Study II (3 credits)
Prerequisites: DART 651; written permission of any faculty member of the Thesis Advisory Committee and the Graduate Program Director; a cumulative GPA of 3.70 or higher. Students may enrol in a directed study under faculty supervision in order to undertake a specialized study of theoretical or research-creation related topics.
DART 671 Professional Internship I (3 credits)
Prerequisites: Nine credits completed in the Master of Design program; a cumulative GPA of 3.70 or higher; a clearly defined written agreement between the student intern and the employer; written permission of any faculty member of the Thesis Advisory Committee and the Graduate Program Director. This course provides an opportunity for students to further develop their design research in a design firm, cultural organization or residency.
DART 672 Professional Internship II (3 credits)
Prerequisites: DART 671; a cumulative GPA of 3.70 or higher; a clearly defined written agreement between the student intern and the employer; written permission of any faculty member of the Thesis Advisory Committee and the Graduate Program Director. This course provides an opportunity for students to further develop their design research in a design firm, cultural organization or residency.
DART 690 Master’s Research and Thesis (24 credits)
Prerequisites: DART 610 and DART 611.
The Master’s Research and Thesis will combine a body of work or practice-led research with a written thesis document of 40-55 pages that contextualizes the practice historically and theoretically and reflects critically on the process and production. A formal oral defense and a final public exhibition of the work or practice-led research are required.
DART 500 Individual Research Project (6 credits)
Students will have the opportunity to research the application of digital design in one or two of the following areas of concentration, under the direction of a full-time faculty advisor.
Design for Print Media
Student research projects will explore aspects of digitally-generated print media. Projects can be undertaken in experimental and applied image, in graphic design, typography, font exploration and generation, packaging book works and posters.
Applied and Experimental 3D Object Making
Student research projects will involve the design of three-dimensional objects, space and environments. This design option integrates the learning of computer software for 3D modeling, rendering and animation programs, computer aided design (CAD), computer aided machining (CAM) programs for plotting, rapid prototyping for block and concept modeling and using a 3D scanner to measure existing objects for computer input.
Interactive Media
Student research projects will investigate screen-based digital design and interactive systems. These will include websites, animation, the design of virtual spaces, interactive desktop presentations and visual navigation systems, the design and interface of virtual communities, distance learning and CD ROM based interactive educational and cultural projects, and web based national and international exchange opportunities.
Inter-media and Hybrid Practice
Student research projects will focus on digital integration or hybrid practices including social design or art interventions, installations, exhibitions, compilation works that use cross-discipline means of expression, and include the integration of digital technology into the process or final production.
Theoretical Investigations in Design Art
Student research projects will be used to investigate the theoretical constructs and discourse relating to the impact of digital technologies in art and design. This will also include the application of digital technologies for appropriate pedagogies and the development of innovative teaching methodology.
DART 502 Language, Politics, Manifestos - Reading Seminar (3 credits)
The readings in this seminar will examine the ethical responsibilities, social impact, and cultural consequences of the new technologies in design art practice. The course will identify, situate and develop a language for dialogue and discourse. The issues considered will be on design ecology and ethics, gender polarization and biases, political strategies in the public sphere, and essential declarations of the digital era, in present and future technological environments.
DART 503 Theories of Interactivity (3 credits)
This course will explore the new opportunities designers have to fundamentally change the ways in which information is organized, manipulated and disseminated in the context of new communications technologies. The computer, as a medium for expression, will be explored through issues of cognition, metaphor, narrative structures, the creation of three dimensional objects and environments, symbolic interaction, information architecture and interactive visual navigational systems.
DART 504 Contextualizing Design Practice (3 credits)
This course approaches design and digital technologies through interdisciplinary theoretical engagement to investigate the cultural and discursive context in which design resides. Through a combination of seminar discussions, workshops, and individual writings, students situate their work in different environments, such as commercial, public or domestic contexts, and explore new venues of dissemination. Such investigations enhance students’ ability to contextualize, articulate and exhibit the thesis work.
DART 510 Independent Study (3 credits)
Prerequisite: Written permission of the Graduate Program Director.
Independent study proposals must be supported by a full-time faculty supervisor and approved with written permission by the Graduate Program Director. The student undertakes research in a specific field or topic relevant to their area of study.
CPTP 501 Connections (3 credits)
Through discussion, readings and papers, students explore ways in which designers and production personnel can participate, collaborate and contribute as full partners in the creation of live performance. Counter-intuitive links are explored in the creation of vibrant and chaotically dynamic works.
CPTP 502 The Art of Proficiency (3 credits)
This seminar focuses on describing the connection between imagination and the production-based realities associated with live performance. Through the analysis of various aspects of production, students look at ways of bridging the gap between inspiration, imagination and originality and their practical application within all aspects of production.
CPTP 503 Aspects of Visual, Aural and Performing Arts (3 credits)
This seminar helps the student develop new perspectives by dealing with the fusion between the student’s present practice and other art forms. Throughout the semester, students meet various practicing artists in their work environment or as guest speakers at the university.
CPTP 511 Practical Study I (3 credits)
Under faculty supervision and based on their previous experience or areas of study, students learn how to apply a large number of creative and practical techniques from a chosen discipline towards achieving a cohesive artistic goal as dictated by current practices in the performing and related live arts. These individual projects must be selected in consultation with the program advisor and approved by the program director.
CPTP 512 Practical Study II (3 credits)
Under faculty supervision and based on their previous experience or areas of study, students expand their language and discourse in the performing arts, focusing on communication and collaboration, while marrying the philosophical and the theoretical with the practical. These individual projects must be selected in consultation with the program advisor and approved by the program director.
CPTP 513 Practical Study III (3 credits)
Under faculty supervision and based on their previous experience or areas of study, this practical study prepares the students both artistically and practically, deepening their insight into the theoretical and practical universes supporting live performance, whether within well-established and traditional artistic disciplines or within innovative and new methods of creation. These individual projects must be selected in consultation with the program advisor and approved by the program director.
CPTP 514 Practical Study IV (3 credits)
Under faculty supervision and based on their previous experience or areas of study, students work alongside professional artists either within the university or in a well-established artistic institution. Students are then given immediate ‘hands on’ access to various aspects of production development, construction and staging processes associated with the most current industry expectation and practice. These individual projects must be selected in consultation with the program advisor and approved by the program director.
CPTP 515 Independent Study (3 credits)
An Independent Study proposal must be supported by a full-time faculty supervisor and approved by and with written permission from the program director (in consultation with the coordinating committee). The student generates a topic to be explored from a specific field relevant to their area of study.
CPTP 598 Special Topics in Creative Practices in Technical Production (3 credits)
Topics may address a wide range of critical fields related to technical production for live performance examining both conventional and non-traditional approaches to dance, music, theatre, as well as other performance or media arts. Subject matter will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Change in content will be indicated by the letter following the number (i.e. CPTP 598A, CPTP 598B etc.)
MSCA 602 Applied Linear Statistical Models (3 credits) *
MSCA 683 Applied Multivariate Data Analysis (3 credits) *
* May not be required depending on previous studies.
Phase II (Required Courses)
ADMI 870 Research Methodology in Management or approved equivalent (3 credits)
ADMI 880 Pedagogical Methods or approved equivalent (3 credits)
ADMI 889 Comprehensive Examinations (6 credits)
Phase II (Elective Courses) Minimum of 4 courses (12 credits) in the area of specialization plus 1 additional course (3 credits)
Elective courses offered in the following disciplines vary in content from term to term and from year to year. All seminars are 3 credits.
ADMI 800-809 Business Economics
ADMI 810-819 Organizational Behaviour
ADMI 820-829 Decision Sciences and Management Information Systems
ADMI 830-839 Marketing
ADMI 840-849 Finance
ADMI 850-859 Business Policy and Strategy
ADMI 860-869 Accountancy and Control
Phase III (Thesis)
ADMI 890 Thesis (60 credits)
MSCA 699 Research Thesis (21 credits)
The MSc thesis is intended to provide candidates with an opportunity to carry out an investigation in-depth in a particular area of interest and to make a contribution to knowledge in the area. It is expected that the thesis will include a comprehensive and critical synthesis of the relevant literature and will also embody either a theoretical contribution to knowledge, a rigorous empirical investigation or both.
A Thesis Committee consists of a faculty member from the department as supervisor and two other faculty members. An Examining Committee consists of the Thesis Committee and a Thesis Examination Chair appointed by the Associate Dean, Research and Research Programs in accordance with the thesis regulations specified in the relevant section of this calendar.
Seminar Descriptions
MSCA 602 Applied Linear Statistical Models
The course focuses on systematic treatments of linear statistical models for regression, analysis of variance and experimental design with special emphasis on applications in business and economics. Topics include regression analysis: inference, model building, diagnostics, remedial measures and validation; single-factor and two-factor ANOVA models, and analysis of covariance. Other statistical tools for specialized applications discussed may include logistic regression, path analysis and time series regression. Case studies are employed to illustrate tools for fitting, checking, validating and interpreting linear models.
MSCA 615 Research Methodology - Administrative Sciences
This seminar provides a basic understanding of the research process and a knowledge of the methods used in the design and execution of scientific research relevant to social sciences, and specifically the business context. The seminar helps students to develop skills needed to assess the feasibility and potential contribution of proposed studies, and to critically evaluate research reported by others. The application of relevant research methods are reviewed through discussions of exemplary articles published in leading journals. Cornerstone topics in this seminar include: theory construction, measurement, overview of data collection methods, reliability, as well as internal and external validity issues.
Note: Students who have taken MSCA 612, MSCA 613 or MSCA 614 may not take this seminar for credit.
MSCA 693 Seminar in Special Topics in Decision Sciences and Management Information Systems
Note: Changes in topic will be indicated by the letter following this seminar number (e.g., MSCA 693A, MSCA 693B).
EMBA 610 Measuring and Reporting Financial Performance (3 credits)
The focus of this course is on the use of financial statements to assess a company's performance and the creation of firm value. The objective is to understand the relation between a company's strategic decisions, business activities and its financial statements. It also examines how boards of directors and investors can gauge the effectiveness of managerial stewardship in the creation of shareholder value. The course is taught using the case method.
EMBA 611 Managing Talent (3 credits)
The issues related to the management of people within organizations are the focus of the course. The course covers the broad topics of human behaviour and motivation as well as the processes that influence these in organizational contexts. Topics include human resource planning, recruiting, selection, training and development, performance management, compensation and legal frameworks for non-union and union environments.  The course uses case studies, in-class exercises and exams. Students develop an understanding of the strategic partnership between the human resource function and managers allowing the company to capitalize fully on the potential of people as a source of competitive advantage.
EMBA 612 Marketing Management (3 credits)
The important role of marketing is studied and the skills developed to lead this function in an organization or to interact effectively with it. Attention is given to such topics as marketing planning, strategy formulation and control, customer focus, customer value creation, positioning, branding, pricing, communications and distribution. Deploying lectures, case discussions and application-oriented readings, the requisite mindset is nurtured to facilitate marketing excellence in today's multi-faceted and dynamic external environment.
EMBA 613 Capital Markets and Financial Management (3 credits)
The role of financial information in corporate management is examined. Students learn how the capital markets process and aggregate information provided by firms and governments in order to evaluate the risk and return trade-offs of business decisions. Students apply this knowledge to the evaluation of alternative investment opportunities. They learn how to identify and interpret the information needed to make profitable investment decisions.
EMBA 615 Live JMSB Experience (1 credit)
The Live JMSB Experience, an integrative course, gives students the opportunity to use the knowledge acquired during the first term in a context that mirrors the reality of contemporary business. Students are exposed to senior managers of a Canadian company facing strategic and managerial issues. Using critical thinking, students work in teams to craft a solution for the company and present their recommendations to a panel of the senior managers and faculty members.
EMBA 620 Value Creation through Business Processes (3 credits)
This course looks at how companies can improve their business processes to deliver services or build products that are valued by their customers. In today’s business environment, companies are closely interconnected with global supply chains and distribution channels as well as multiple stakeholders. In this course, students learn to design, operate and improve a network of operations among various stakeholders to ensure that systems are properly managed so that the flow of material and information is fluid. Some of the topics covered include supply chain network design, service delivery improvement, sourcing, risk management and enterprise resource planning (ERP).
EMBA 621 Information Technology and Digital Strategy (3 credits)
Students learn how advances in information technologies, connectivity and data analytics are transforming business models and creating new avenues for business value creation. This course provides students with a business-driven leadership perspective on information technology (IT) by leveraging digital technologies for competitive advantage. Within the context of  IT and digital strategy, topics covered may include: strategic alignment of IT, the impact of disruptive technologies on business models, effective leadership of IT, governance, project portfolio management, strategic sourcing, e-commerce, data analytics, privacy and cybersecurity.
EMBA 622 Business, Government and the Economy (1.5 credits)
The course provides a non-technical introduction to government policy analysis from the perspective of the business executive. We begin with a discussion of the differences between private and public goods and the impact of external forces on different stakeholders. The role of government and business in the creation and resolution of problems created by outside influences will be evaluated. Topics discussed in class may include the nature and role of public-private partnerships, regulation as both a limitation and an opportunity and the role of government in international trade and foreign direct investment.
EMBA 623 Managing in a Global Environment (3 credits)
The complexities of doing business in a global environment are studied. Major issues include supply chain management, cross-cultural management and communication, global investment and partnership, international strategy and marketing, international human resource management, ethics, law and social responsibility. A portion of this course also integrates the economic, social, cultural and business aspects of the region visited in the Global Experience course.
EMBA 625 Global Experience (1 credit)
This integrative course allows students to experience doing business abroad. Scheduled at the end of the second term, students have the opportunity to apply the business knowledge gained by being exposed to business practices in a specific region. The global experience takes students inside individual companies and industries abroad and provides them with an overview of the broader economic, political, social and cultural factors that influence business opportunities and practices.
EMBA 630 Financial Decisions Under Uncertainty (3 credits)
Students apply recent advances in corporate finance theory to evaluate complex decisions that may have a profound effect on the future of a firm. Through the use of cases and projects, students evaluate and recommend different decisions within the constraints imposed by the ownership and governance structure of the firm. Examples include making choices on raising debt or equity, using capital for investment or to reward shareholders and whether to go public or remain private.
EMBA 631 Management Control Systems (3 credits)
In this course, students learn how to use performance measurement, evaluation and incentive control systems to create value for an organization and its stakeholders. Control systems are critical for success in the implementation of a firm’s strategy and the course highlights several managerial challenges in this regard. Students learn to use limited physical, human and financial resources efficiently and creatively within uncertainty conditions. A “how-to” approach is adopted that emphasizes practical cases and applications reflecting real organizational issues.
EMBA 632 Creativity and Innovation (1.5 credits)
Students are introduced to the theoretical concepts of creativity and innovation with the goal of implementing novel ideas in organizations. The purpose is to develop students’ own creative abilities to solve business challenges in a more effective way. Based on lectures, case studies and experiential exercises, the course also proposes techniques needed to foster innovative processes in others.
EMBA 635 Starting a New Venture (3 credits)
The goal of this integrative course is to engage students in the theory and practice of entrepreneurship and innovation in businesses. The course is built around a group project whose objective is to create a comprehensive innovative business plan for a novel stand-alone business, or a new line of business within an existing organization. This project provides students with an opportunity to identify a market opportunity. Students assess its business potential and viability, structure and financing options as well as exit strategies. Groups present their business plans to a board of potential investors.
EMBA 640 Leadership (3 credits)
Leadership is the process of influencing and supporting others in the accomplishment of a common task. In addition to providing a critical review of key concepts, models, and theories of leadership, the course allows students to develop and apply their leadership abilities in organizational settings, especially in the context of change. Students are engaged in practical exercises, case studies, simulations and role-playing activities. Elements of the leadership development module are integrated and leveraged within the course in order to improve students’ ability to lead with purpose, inspire others and enable change.
EMBA 641 Corporate Governance (1.5 credits)
Students learn the principles and practices underlying governance, the system by which organizations are directed and controlled to create value for their shareholders but also to all stakeholders involved in its value chain.  Students review how an organization’s governance structure allocates rights and responsibilities to make decisions among stakeholders and specifies procedures for decision making. The course focus on the actions and decisions of corporate boards of directors and on their interactions with managers and stakeholders such as investors.  Particular attention is directed toward the ethical and sustainability dimensions of corporate governance.
EMBA 642 Crafting and Implementing a Winning Strategy (3 credits)
The important issues involved in developing strategy in various business sectors are the focus of the course. Students learn to formulate strategies that clearly state the growth path for companies. The course also looks at winning strategies defining how companies can compete against their rivals in specific business sectors. Students study strategy implementation and examine how functional strategies can be key instruments for business success. The course also looks at the relationship between strategy, culture and structure of the organization.
EMBA 646 Applied Field Project (3.5 credits)
This capstone integrative course provides students with the opportunity to tackle a major business problem or issue of their choice, thereby allowing them to apply the knowledge and competencies acquired in the program.  In teams, students develop a business project proposal focusing on a problem or issue faced by the organization they have chosen. Students are then expected to gather data and develop innovative and practical responses to the complex, cross-disciplinary issues faced by their client organization. Student teams are required to present a comprehensive set of recommendations to a panel comprised of faculty members, EMBA peers and representatives of the client organization. The key deliverable of this course is the actual set of recommendations and implementation plan designed to address the selected problem or issue.
MSCA 601: Financial Economics (3 credits)
MSCA 602: Applied Linear Statistical Models (3 credits)
MSCA 611: Research Methodology - Finance (3 credits)
15 credits of Finance seminars: (see Finance Seminars).
Upon approval of the Department  MSc Finance Advisor and the instructor, up to six credits of electives may include the following:
Seminars in any other JMSB MSc program;
PhD seminar in Finance (ADMI 840-849);
Cognate graduate seminars offered by other departments within the university
21 credits, MSCA 699: Research Thesis
Courses
Finance Seminars
Each year a selection of specialized seminars will be offered on a rotating basis from those listed below.
MSCA 621 Seminar in Investment Theory
MSCA 622 Seminar in Investment Management
MSCA 623 Seminar in Financial Theory and Corporate Policy
MSCA 624 Seminar in Mergers, Restructuring, and Corporate Control
MSCA 625 Seminar in Options and Futures
MSCA 632 Seminar in Special Topics in Finance
Note: Changes in topic will be indicated by the letter following this seminar number (e.g., MSCA 632A, MSCA 632B).
Seminar Descriptions
MSCA 601 Financial Economics
This course introduces the theory of financial decision making. The fundamental issue to be addressed in finance is the allocation of scarce resources between current consumption and future consumption (investment). The interesting questions will arise when one considers the valuation of risky investment opportunities. An additional objective of the seminar is to learn how to conduct and present research.
MSCA 602 Applied Linear Statistical Models
The course focuses on systematic treatments of linear statistical models for regression, analysis of variance and experimental design with special emphasis on applications in business and economics. Topics include regression analysis: inference, model building, diagnostics, remedial measures and validation; single-factor and two-factor ANOVA models, and analysis of covariance. Other statistical tools for specialized applications discussed may include logistic regression, path analysis and time series regression. Case studies are employed to illustrate tools for fitting, checking, validating and interpreting linear models.
MSCA 611 Research Methodology - Finance
This seminar studies several approaches that are used in conducting research in finance. There are three main objectives for this seminar: a) to provide guidance and experience in the design and critique of empirical research; b) to provide an introduction to the use of financial data bases; and c) to provide experience in the conduct of an empirial research project. Specific topics addressed include: event study methodologies, time-series issues including unit root problems and time varying volatility estimation, as well as qualitative choice methods, performance appraisal tests, and simultaneous equation estimation.
MSCA 699 Research Thesis (21 credits)
The MSc thesis is intended to provide candidates with an opportunity to carry out an in-depth investigation in a particular area of interest and to make a contribution to knowledge in the area. It is expected that the thesis will include a comprehensive and critical synthesis of the relevant literature and will also embody either a theoretical contribution to knowledge, a rigorous empirical investigation or both.
A Thesis Committee consists of a faculty member from the department as supervisor and two other faculty members. An Examining Committee consists of the Thesis Committee and a Thesis Examination Chair appointed by the Associate Dean, Research and Research Programs in accordance with the thesis regulations specified in the relevant section of this calendar.
GIIM 610 Economics (3 credits)
This course will examine the theoretical basis and investment implications of macroeconomic and microeconomic principles, including the key components of economic activity, industrial organization, macro theory and policy, international trade, and exchange rates.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 610, MIM 610, or IMBA 610 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 611 Financial Statement Analysis I (3 credits)
This course will examine the fundamental financial statements and the impact of different accounting principles on those statements. The course will examine the treatment of such items as income taxes, inventories, depreciation, and leases from the perspective of the investment analyst. International differences in accounting standards will also be examined.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 611, MIM 611, or IMBA 611 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 613 Asset Pricing and Portfolio Management I (1.5 credits)
This course will examine the efficient markets hypothesis and introduce the classic asset pricing models (domestic and international). The key elements of the theory and practice of the portfolio management process, including investment policy, asset allocation, and client relations will be examined in the domestic and international context.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 613, MIM 613, or IMBA 613 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 614 Security Valuation in the Domestic and International Environment (3 credits)
This course will examine security (equity and fixed income) risk and valuation (for companies and industries) using alternative methodologies. The characteristics of global financial markets and the implications for security valuation will be examined. The theory and analysis of derivative securities will be introduced.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 614, MIM 614, or IMBA 614 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 615 CFA® Exam Preparation Course Level I (1.5 credits)
This course will review the material needed for the Level I CFA® exam. Successful completion of this course includes passing the CFA® Level I Exam.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 615, MIM 615, or IMBA 615 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 616 Quantitative Techniques (3 credits)
This course will examine the nature of the models used in the valuation and evaluation of investments, the theoretical and practical use of these models, comparison of classical or traditional models based on statistical analysis versus those based on more recent developments.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 612, MIM 612, IMBA 612, DIM 616, MIM 616, or IMBA 616 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 617 Corporate Finance (1.5 credits)
This module covers the theory and practice of corporate finance with emphasis on concepts such as cash flow, liquidity, leverage, cost of capital, project evaluation, and dividend policy.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 612, MIM 612, IMBA 612, DIM 617, MIM 617, or IMBA 617 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 618 Seminar in Corporate Finance (3 credits)
Prerequisite: For MIM and GIIM MBA Students: GIIM 615 or DIM 615 or MIM 615 or IMBA 615.
This course focuses on the application of modern finance theory to corporate decisions. It examines the firm’s investment and financial decisions under various economic and financial conditions. Specific topics include mergers and acquisitions, leverage buyout decisions and dividend and equity management strategies.
Note: Students who have taken MIM 618 or IMBA 618 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 619 Marketing Management (3 credits)
The main goal of this course is to develop a comprehensive understanding of the strategic role of marketing within the firm and within the Canadian context. It covers all aspects of the marketing management process. This course is designed to help develop the necessary skills to analyze market opportunities, research and select target markets, design effective marketing strategies, plan marketing programs, and organize, implement and control the marketing effort. The specificities of the marketing of services and their implications in terms of marketing strategies are emphasized.
GIIM 620 Financial Statement Analysis II (3 credits)
Prerequisite: For MIM and GIIM MBA students: GIIM 615 or DIM 615 or MIM 615 or IMBA 615.
This course examines the analysis and use of financial statements and disclosures in the investment valuation process, as well as the impact of international differences and managerial choice on the financial statements.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 620, MIM 620, or IMBA 620 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 621 Fixed Income Analysis (1.5 credits)
Prerequisite: For MIM and GIIM MBA students: GIIM 615 or DIM 615 or MIM 615 or IMBA 615.
This course deals with the risk and return characteristics of debt instruments, term structure of interest rates, valuation of securities with embedded derivative securities or other unique features. The unique features of real estate and private equity investments are also covered.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 621, MIM 621, or IMBA 621 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 622 Derivatives (3 credits)
Prerequisite: For MIM and GIIM MBA students: GIIM 615 or DIM 615 or MIM 615 or IMBA 615.
This course focuses on the theory and practice of futures, swaps and option valuation.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 622, MIM 622, or IMBA 622 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 623 Asset Pricing and Portfolio Management II (1.5 credits)
Prerequisite: For MIM and GIIM MBA students: GIIM 615 or DIM 615 or MIM 615 or IMBA 615.
This course analyzes the theory and critically evaluates the empirical evidence regarding asset pricing models. Implications for the correlation structure of returns and the impact on risk and return forecasting are also covered. This course discusses the role of alternative portfolio management philosophies and their implications for asset valuations and portfolio performance evaluation. Topics include the use and role of quantitative methods in the evaluation and forecasting of investment performance as well as the implications of asset pricing model predictions and failures for portfolio management.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 623, MIM 623, or IMBA 623 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 624 Analysis of Equity Investments (3 credits)
Prerequisite: For MIM and GIIM MBA students: GIIM 615 or DIM 615 or MIM 615 or IMBA 615.
This course reviews the use of fundamental analysis and other methodologies to generate investment valuations and risk analyses. The impact of special situations on the valuation process and the valuation of equity derivative securities will be examined.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 624, MIM 624, or IMBA 624 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 625 CFA® Exam Preparation Course Level II (non-credit)
Prerequisite: GIIM 615, DIM 615, MIM 615 or IMBA 615.
This course will review the material needed for the Level II CFA® exam. Permission of the Program is required to register for this course.
GIIM 626 Organizational Behaviour (3 credits)
This course focuses on individual and group behavior and the interactions of behavioural phenomena. Concepts such as motivation, leadership, group behaviour and managing change in organizations are examined. Students acquire an understanding of change processes and skills relating to organizational diagnosis and change.
GIIM 631 Asset Allocation and Performance Measurement (3 credits)
Prerequisite: GIIM 625, DIM 625, MIM 625, or IMBA 625.
This course will examine the estimation of expected returns and risks for asset classes and individual assets, the development of strategies for managing portfolios of domestic and foreign securities (equity, fixed income, real estate, etc.), the management of portfolio risk, and the evaluation of portfolio and manager performance.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 631, MIM 631, IMBA 631, DIM 632, MIM 632, or IMBA 632 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 633 Investment Law and Ethics (3 credits)
Prerequisite: For MIM and GIIM MBA students: GIIM 625 or DIM 625 or MIM 625 or IMBA 625.
This course covers issues regarding the management of investment funds including techniques for the identification and prevention of professional misconduct, and the nature and drafting of compliance procedures. The practice of portfolio management and investment valuation are studied through the use of topical cases.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 633, MIM 633, or IMBA 633 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 634 CFA® Exam Preparation Course Level III (non-credit)
Prerequisite: GIIM 625, DIM 625, MIM 625, or IMBA 625.
This course will review the material needed for the Level III CFA® exam. Permission of the Program is required to register for this course.
GIIM 636 Alternative Investments (1.5 credits)
Prerequisite: GIIM 625, DIM 625, MIM 625, or IMBA 625.
This course will cover a description of investments such as hedge funds, real estate and the private equity market.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 621, MIM 621, IMBA 621, MIM 636, or IMBA 636 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 637 Strategic Management (3 credits)
This course integrates the core functional disciplines of business within a strategic perspective and introduces several strategic management concepts, including industry analysis and dynamics, the organizational resource audit, strategic typologies, the role of the general manager, and the management of strategic transformations. The principal goal is to develop and enhance student ability in problem identification, environmental and organizational analysis, strategic alternative formulation, and action implementation. The pedagogy of the course is based upon comprehensive case studies that deal with strategic issues in a variety of contemporary business contexts.
GIIM 653 Seminar in Investment Analysis and Management (3 credits)
Prerequisite: GIIM 625, DIM 625, MIM 625, or IMBA 625.
This course will concentrate heavily on portfolio risk management issues. Topics such as the effect of cash drag, the use of equity and debt derivatives to manage risk and the uses and abuses of value at risk (VAR) will be explored. Other topics include equity style and its importance index funds and relevant criteria for the selection of investment managers.
Note: Students who have taken MIM 653 or IMBA 653 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 654 Seminar in International Investment Analysis and Management (3 credits)
Prerequisite: GIIM 625, DIM 625, MIM 625, or IMBA 625.
This course begins with a discussion of exchange rates and to what extent economic factors and market sentiment are important in the determination of these rates. Issues of importance that international investors face will be examined along with the benefits of international diversification. The course will conclude with the analysis of issues relevant to emerging markets and factors that would influence the construction of a portfolio that may include an emerging market component.
Note: Students who have taken MIM 654 or IMBA 654 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 655 Socially Responsible and Sustainable Investment (3 credits)
The aim of this course is to provide students with a knowledge of socially responsible investment related issues that transcend the modern portfolio theory of Markowitz. Students gain an understanding of sustainable and responsible investment. They also develop the ability to uncover non-traditional risk and return drivers. Relevant case studies and a series of readings are relied upon to provide the basis for the course.
GIIM 695 Special Topics in Investment Management (3 credits)
Note: When offered, this course may substitute a GIIM required core course, for which students must obtain approval of the Program Director in order to register.
GIIM 695 Special Topics in Investment Management (3 credits)
Note: When offered, this course may substitute a GIIM required core course, for which students must obtain approval of the Program Director in order to register.
Non-credit Electives
GIIM 625 CFA® Exam Preparation Course Level II
GIIM 634 CFA® Exam Preparation Course Level III
Course Descriptions
GIIM 610 Economics (3 credits)
This course will examine the theoretical basis and investment implications of macroeconomic and microeconomic principles, including the key components of economic activity, industrial organization, macro theory and policy, international trade, and exchange rates.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 610, MIM 610, or IMBA 610 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 611 Financial Statement Analysis I (3 credits)
This course will examine the fundamental financial statements and the impact of different accounting principles on those statements. The course will examine the treatment of such items as income taxes, inventories, depreciation, and leases from the perspective of the investment analyst. International differences in accounting standards will also be examined.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 611, MIM 611, or IMBA 611 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 613 Asset Pricing and Portfolio Management I (1.5 credits)
This course will examine the efficient markets hypothesis and introduce the classic asset pricing models (domestic and international). The key elements of the theory and practice of the portfolio management process, including investment policy, asset allocation, and client relations will be examined in the domestic and international context.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 613, MIM 613, or IMBA 613 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 614 Security Valuation in the Domestic and International Environment (3 credits)
This course will examine security (equity and fixed income) risk and valuation (for companies and industries) using alternative methodologies. The characteristics of global financial markets and the implications for security valuation will be examined. The theory and analysis of derivative securities will be introduced.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 614, MIM 614, or IMBA 614 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 615 CFA® Exam Preparation Course Level I (1.5 credits)
This course will review the material needed for the Level I CFA® exam. Successful completion of this course includes passing the CFA® Level I Exam.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 615, MIM 615, or IMBA 615 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 616 Quantitative Techniques (3 credits)
This course will examine the nature of the models used in the valuation and evaluation of investments, the theoretical and practical use of these models, comparison of classical or traditional models based on statistical analysis versus those based on more recent developments.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 612, MIM 612, IMBA 612, DIM 616, MIM 616, or IMBA 616 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 617 Corporate Finance (1.5 credits)
This module covers the theory and practice of corporate finance with emphasis on concepts such as cash flow, liquidity, leverage, cost of capital, project evaluation, and dividend policy.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 612, MIM 612, IMBA 612, DIM 617, MIM 617, or IMBA 617 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 618 Seminar in Corporate Finance (3 credits)
Prerequisite: For MIM and GIIM MBA Students: GIIM 615 or DIM 615 or MIM 615 or IMBA 615.
This course focuses on the application of modern finance theory to corporate decisions. It examines the firm’s investment and financial decisions under various economic and financial conditions. Specific topics include mergers and acquisitions, leverage buyout decisions and dividend and equity management strategies.
Note: Students who have taken MIM 618 or IMBA 618 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 619 Marketing Management (3 credits)
The main goal of this course is to develop a comprehensive understanding of the strategic role of marketing within the firm and within the Canadian context. It covers all aspects of the marketing management process. This course is designed to help develop the necessary skills to analyze market opportunities, research and select target markets, design effective marketing strategies, plan marketing programs, and organize, implement and control the marketing effort. The specificities of the marketing of services and their implications in terms of marketing strategies are emphasized.
GIIM 620 Financial Statement Analysis II (3 credits)
Prerequisite: For MIM and GIIM MBA students: GIIM 615 or DIM 615 or MIM 615 or IMBA 615.
This course examines the analysis and use of financial statements and disclosures in the investment valuation process, as well as the impact of international differences and managerial choice on the financial statements.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 620, MIM 620, or IMBA 620 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 621 Fixed Income Analysis (1.5 credits)
Prerequisite: For MIM and GIIM MBA students: GIIM 615 or DIM 615 or MIM 615 or IMBA 615.
This course deals with the risk and return characteristics of debt instruments, term structure of interest rates, valuation of securities with embedded derivative securities or other unique features. The unique features of real estate and private equity investments are also covered.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 621, MIM 621, or IMBA 621 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 622 Derivatives (3 credits)
Prerequisite: For MIM and GIIM MBA students: GIIM 615 or DIM 615 or MIM 615 or IMBA 615.
This course focuses on the theory and practice of futures, swaps and option valuation.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 622, MIM 622, or IMBA 622 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 623 Asset Pricing and Portfolio Management II (1.5 credits)
Prerequisite: For MIM and GIIM MBA students: GIIM 615 or DIM 615 or MIM 615 or IMBA 615.
This course analyzes the theory and critically evaluates the empirical evidence regarding asset pricing models. Implications for the correlation structure of returns and the impact on risk and return forecasting are also covered. This course discusses the role of alternative portfolio management philosophies and their implications for asset valuations and portfolio performance evaluation. Topics include the use and role of quantitative methods in the evaluation and forecasting of investment performance as well as the implications of asset pricing model predictions and failures for portfolio management.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 623, MIM 623, or IMBA 623 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 624 Analysis of Equity Investments (3 credits)
Prerequisite: For MIM and GIIM MBA students: GIIM 615 or DIM 615 or MIM 615 or IMBA 615.
This course reviews the use of fundamental analysis and other methodologies to generate investment valuations and risk analyses. The impact of special situations on the valuation process and the valuation of equity derivative securities will be examined.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 624, MIM 624, or IMBA 624 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 625 CFA® Exam Preparation Course Level II (non-credit)
Prerequisite: GIIM 615, DIM 615, MIM 615 or IMBA 615.
This course will review the material needed for the Level II CFA® exam. Permission of the Program is required to register for this course.
GIIM 626 Organizational Behaviour (3 credits)
This course focuses on individual and group behavior and the interactions of behavioural phenomena. Concepts such as motivation, leadership, group behaviour and managing change in organizations are examined. Students acquire an understanding of change processes and skills relating to organizational diagnosis and change.
GIIM 631 Asset Allocation and Performance Measurement (3 credits)
Prerequisite: GIIM 625, DIM 625, MIM 625, or IMBA 625.
This course will examine the estimation of expected returns and risks for asset classes and individual assets, the development of strategies for managing portfolios of domestic and foreign securities (equity, fixed income, real estate, etc.), the management of portfolio risk, and the evaluation of portfolio and manager performance.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 631, MIM 631, IMBA 631, DIM 632, MIM 632, or IMBA 632 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 633 Investment Law and Ethics (3 credits)
Prerequisite: For MIM and GIIM MBA students: GIIM 625 or DIM 625 or MIM 625 or IMBA 625.
This course covers issues regarding the management of investment funds including techniques for the identification and prevention of professional misconduct, and the nature and drafting of compliance procedures. The practice of portfolio management and investment valuation are studied through the use of topical cases.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 633, MIM 633, or IMBA 633 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 634 CFA® Exam Preparation Course Level III (non-credit)
Prerequisite: GIIM 625, DIM 625, MIM 625, or IMBA 625.
This course will review the material needed for the Level III CFA® exam. Permission of the Program is required to register for this course.
GIIM 636 Alternative Investments (1.5 credits)
Prerequisite: GIIM 625, DIM 625, MIM 625, or IMBA 625.
This course will cover a description of investments such as hedge funds, real estate and the private equity market.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 621, MIM 621, IMBA 621, MIM 636, or IMBA 636 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 637 Strategic Management (3 credits)
This course integrates the core functional disciplines of business within a strategic perspective and introduces several strategic management concepts, including industry analysis and dynamics, the organizational resource audit, strategic typologies, the role of the general manager, and the management of strategic transformations. The principal goal is to develop and enhance student ability in problem identification, environmental and organizational analysis, strategic alternative formulation, and action implementation. The pedagogy of the course is based upon comprehensive case studies that deal with strategic issues in a variety of contemporary business contexts.
GIIM 653 Seminar in Investment Analysis and Management (3 credits)
Prerequisite: GIIM 625, DIM 625, MIM 625, or IMBA 625.
This course will concentrate heavily on portfolio risk management issues. Topics such as the effect of cash drag, the use of equity and debt derivatives to manage risk and the uses and abuses of value at risk (VAR) will be explored. Other topics include equity style and its importance index funds and relevant criteria for the selection of investment managers.
Note: Students who have taken MIM 653 or IMBA 653 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 654 Seminar in International Investment Analysis and Management (3 credits)
Prerequisite: GIIM 625, DIM 625, MIM 625, or IMBA 625.
This course begins with a discussion of exchange rates and to what extent economic factors and market sentiment are important in the determination of these rates. Issues of importance that international investors face will be examined along with the benefits of international diversification. The course will conclude with the analysis of issues relevant to emerging markets and factors that would influence the construction of a portfolio that may include an emerging market component.
Note: Students who have taken MIM 654 or IMBA 654 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 655 Socially Responsible and Sustainable Investment (3 credits)
The aim of this course is to provide students with a knowledge of socially responsible investment related issues that transcend the modern portfolio theory of Markowitz. Students gain an understanding of sustainable and responsible investment. They also develop the ability to uncover non-traditional risk and return drivers. Relevant case studies and a series of readings are relied upon to provide the basis for the course.
GIIM 695 Special Topics in Investment Management (3 credits)
Note: When offered, this course may substitute a GIIM required core course, for which students must obtain approval of the Program Director in order to register.
MBA in Investment Management Co-operative Option
The MBA in Investment Management Co-operative Option is non-credit and is offered to all students who are enrolled in the John Molson MBA in Investment Management Program.
Students accepted into the Co-op must be registered as full-time, have completed 19.5 credits, maintain a cumulative GPA of 3.0 or better and must be approved by the Director of the program.
New students complete one work term (four months). In special cases, students may complete a second term with the permission of the Program Director and Institute for Co-operative Education. Students must return to full-time study for their last term.
MSCA 602: Applied Linear Statistical Models (3 credits)
MSCA 615: Research Methodology - Administrative Sciences (3 credits)
18 credits of Management seminars: (see Management Seminars).
Upon approval of the Department MSc Management Advisor and the instructor, up to nine credits may include the following:
Seminars in any other JMSB MSc program;
PhD seminar in Management (ADMI 810-819 and ADMI 850-859).
Cognate graduate seminars offered by other departments within the university
21 credits, MSCA 699: Research Thesis
Courses
Management Seminars
Each year a selection of specialized seminars will be offered on a rotating basis from those listed below.
MSCA 640 Seminar in Organizational Behaviour
MSCA 641 Seminar in Staffing and Career Management
MSCA 643  Seminar in Motivation, Evaluation and Rewards
MSCA 644 Seminar in Meso Organizational Behaviour
MSCA 645 Seminar in Organizational Theory and Design
MSCA 646 Seminar in Leadership
MSCA 647 Seminar in Strategic Management in Global Context
MSCA 648 Seminar in International Management
MSCA 649 Seminar in Comparative Corporate Governance
MSCA 651 Seminar in Entrepreneurship across Contexts
MSCA 652 Seminar in Special Topics in Management
Note: Changes in topic will be indicated by the letter following this seminar number (e.g., MSCA 652A, MSCA 652B).
MSCA 654 Seminar in Consulting
Seminar Descriptions
MSCA 602 Applied Linear Statistical Models
The course focuses on systematic treatments of linear statistical models for regression, analysis of variance and experimental design with special emphasis on applications in business and economics. Topics include regression analysis: inference, model building, diagnostics, remedial measures and validation; single-factor and two-factor ANOVA models, and analysis of covariance. Other statistical tools for specialized applications discussed may include logistic regression, path analysis and time series regression. Case studies are employed to illustrate tools for fitting, checking, validating and interpreting linear models.
MSCA 615 Research Methodology - Administrative Sciences
This seminar provides a basic understanding of the research process and a knowledge of the methods used in the design and execution of scientific research relevant to social sciences, and specifically the business context. The seminar helps students to develop skills needed to assess the feasibility and potential contribution of proposed studies, and to critically evaluate research reported by others. The application of relevant research methods are reviewed through discussions of exemplary articles published in leading journals. Cornerstone topics in this seminar include: theory construction, measurement, overview of data collection methods, reliability, as well as internal and external validity issues.
Note: Students who have taken MSCA 612, MSCA 613 or MSCA 614 may not take this seminar for credit.
MSCA 640 Seminar in Organizational Behaviour (3 credits)
This course reviews the important developments in administrative and behavioural thinking and focuses on the work of management scholars who have made significant contributions to the theory and practice of management. The course spans the various levels of organization analysis (individual, group and organizational) and a variety of perspectives on organizational behaviour, organizational theory and administrative thought. Students are expected to understand and be able to assess critically the concepts, theories and scholarly contributions of material covered in this course. The state of the art both in theory and empirical research are emphasized.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a MSCA 652 number may not take this course for credit.
MSCA 641 Seminar in Staffing and Career Management (3 credits)
This seminar provides an overview of theory, research, and applications in the fields of staffing and career management. We discuss the processes of getting job applicants into organizations and of retaining them and moving them through the ranks once they are there. Specific topics to be explored include organizational context and staffing strategy, legal issues, internal and external recruitment processes, selection methods, promotions and employee training. Emphasis is placed on scholarly reviews of the evidence, analysis of primary research articles, and the application of science-based practice to the processes of staffing and career management.
MSCA 643 Seminar in Motivation, Evaluation and Rewards (3 credits)
This seminar is designed to help students learn about theory, research, and applications in the field of human resource management, specifically with regards to the topics of: motivation, performance evaluation, financial and non-financial rewards, and employee well-being. The impact of these activities on international human resource management is also covered. Students become familiar with the dominant approaches pertaining to these topics, and reflect on how these topics are related to one another. Students also learn about how to conduct high-quality research on these topics, and how to use research to solve organizational problems.
MSCA 644 Seminar in Meso Organizational Behaviour
Meso organizational behaviour focuses on understanding organizational phenomena by bridging concepts or theories at the individual (i.e. micro) and the contextual (i.e.macro) levels of analysis. The seminar examines people within organizations by exploring different levels of analysis, including individuals, groups, departments, organizations, industries, and societies. It focuses on better understanding how similar phenomena may operate at different levels, how phenomena at any one level are shaped by phenomena at other levels, and the reciprocal dynamics that exist between levels to make up the world of organizations in which we live and work. Meso organizational behaviour is important because: (a) it helps students of human resource management better understand the systemic factors that contribute to how individuals think, feel, and act in organizations; and (b) it helps students better understand how organizations are shaped by the people that populate them.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a MSCA 652 number may not take this course for credit.
MSCA 645 Seminar in Organizational Theory and Design (3 credits)
In this seminar we explore organizations and organizational environments. The primary aim is to introduce students to an understanding of how organizational scholars have conceptualized and studied organizations as systems of structures and relations and as cultural systems, and how these systems interact with and are embedded in the context of an external environment. To accomplish this aim the seminar focuses on some basic sociological tools for conceptually investigating a variety of organizational topics. Students acquire an in-depth understanding of how organizations are made up of formal, relational and cultural structures both inside and outside the organizational boundary. Some topics and conceptual frameworks include power, conflict, organizational identity and image, organizational control, discourse and rhetoric, legitimacy, organizational impression management, emergence of new organizations, and organizational change.
MSCA 646 Seminar in Leadership (3 credits)
This course adopts the interactional framework of leadership, which considers that the leadership process is a function of three components: the leader, the followers, and the context. The course is structured to cover classic and emergent theories that address each of these components; though most theories focus on one of these three components, they also inform the other components in the model, either implicitly or explicitly. Implications for the practice of leadership are addressed through class discussions. An effort is made to ensure that students do not adopt a myopic view of leadership. Rather, different perspectives on the process of leadership are presented, that make radically different assumptions. Students are therefore required to identify these assumptions and develop well-articulated arguments that either support or refute these assumptions in order to develop a sophisticated view of leadership.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a MSCA 652 number may not take this course for credit.
MSCA 647 Seminar in Strategic Management in Global Context (3 credits)
This seminar provides a broad survey of core literature and research findings in the strategic-management and international-business fields, exploring the opportunities and challenges associated with conducting business in a global context. The objective of this course is to provide a theoretical overview of strategic management with a particular emphasis on the strategy of multinational enterprises. By the end of the course, students should understand the basic theories within the field and should develop their skills in framing research questions relevant to strategy or globalization.
MSCA 648 Seminar in International Management (3 credits)
This seminar is designed to introduce students to the key concepts and important areas of research related to globalization, multinational corporate strategies, and organizations and management systems in both developed and developing countries. We start with an overview of international management and multinational enterprise theories followed by a discussion on important methodological issues for doing research in an international context. The impacts of national culture and national institutions of different countries on today’s global business environment are discussed as well. Specific areas such as internationalization of small and medium-sized enterprises, entry modes, international joint ventures, and management practices are covered. The seminar concludes by discussing future research trends in this field. A key goal is to articulate appropriate research questions, develop theoretical frameworks, design empirical strategies, and to write an academic paper using key components from this seminar.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a MSCA 652 number may not take this course for credit.
MSCA 649 Seminar in Comparative Corporate Governance (3 credits)
Corporate governance, defined broadly, is the study of power and influence over decision making within the corporation. Comparative corporate governance examines how institutions in different social and economic contexts influence this relationship and its consequences for the ownership, management, and strategic competitiveness of firms. In this seminar we address questions such as: How is corporate governance practised in different countries? Why are corporate governance practices similar or different across countries? Can we identify international best practices of corporate governance? To what extent are corporate governance best practices transferable across international contexts? How do different systems of corporate governance embody different economic, social, and political trade-offs among corporate stakeholders? We approach the questions from managerial, economic, legal, political, sociological and cultural perspectives. Using both conceptual and empirical studies, we also focus on a range of substantial issues, including corporate governance in family firms and in emerging market business groups.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a MSCA 652 number may not take this course for credit.
MSCA 651 Seminar in Entrepreneurship across Contexts (3 credits)
This course provides an overview of the diverse manifestations of contemporary entrepreneurship research. We review and critically evaluate the study of entrepreneurship across the contexts of new venture creation, family, social, sustainable, corporate, bottom of the pyramid and others. We cross levels of analysis—from individual to family, to firm, to network, to industry—and theoretical traditions. There is a strong emphasis on critical reasoning, empirical scrutiny and theoretical development. Students develop competencies in all aspects of the entrepreneurship research process, culminating with their own independent contributions to the field through a novel research paper.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under a MSCA 652 number may not take this course for credit.
MSCA 654 Seminar in Consulting (3 credits)
This course focuses on the management consulting profession and process. The course is structured around three parallel streams and provides important concepts and ideas for the tool-kit of the management consultant involved in analytical as well as change implementation projects. The first stream of the course examines the consulting process, i.e. the five phases of a consulting project from entry to termination. The second stream focuses on core consulting skills, i.e. the skills required to operate and succeed as a management consultant. These skills are essential for any type of consulting engagement, whether one works as an external or internal consultant, and whether the client in a private sector, public, or non-profit organization. The third stream is a real world consulting project that students conduct in teams with a client firm in order to apply the tools and skills discussed in class. The course concludes by reflecting on the role of internal consultants and management consulting as a career choice.
MSCA 699 Research Thesis (21 credits)
The MSc thesis is intended to provide candidates with an opportunity to carry out an investigation in-depth in a particular area of interest and to make a contribution to knowledge in the area. It is expected that the thesis will include a comprehensive and critical synthesis of the relevant literature and will also embody either a theoretical contribution to knowledge, a rigorous empirical investigation or both.
A Thesis Committee consists of a faculty member from the department as supervisor and two other faculty members. An Examining Committee consists of the Thesis Committee and a Thesis Examination Chair appointed by the Associate Dean, Research and Research Programs in accordance with the thesis regulations specified in the relevant section of this calendar.
MSCA 602: Applied Linear Statistical Models (3 credits)
MSCA 615: Research Methodology - Administrative Sciences (3 credits)
18 credits of Marketing seminars: (see Marketing Seminars).
Upon approval of the Department MSc Marketing Advisor and the instructor, up to nine credits may include the following:
Seminars in any other JMSB MSc program
PhD seminar in Marketing (ADMI 830-839)
Cognate graduate seminars offered by other departments within the university
21 credits, MSCA 699: Research Thesis
Courses
Marketing Seminars
Each year a selection of specialized seminars will be offered on a rotating basis from those listed below.
MSCA 662 Seminar in Qualitative Research 1
MSCA 663 Seminar in Consumer Research Methods 2
MSCA 665 Seminar in Marketing Communications
MSCA 667 Seminar in Consumer Psychology and Decision Making 3
MSCA 668 Seminar in Innovation and Marketing
MSCA 669 Seminar in Pricing Management 4
MSCA 671 Seminar in Relationship Marketing Strategy 5
MSCA 672 Seminar in Special Topics in Marketing *
MSCA 673 Seminar in Segmentation and Positioning in Marketing 6
MSCA 674 Seminar in Meaning and Management of Brands 7
MSCA 675 Seminar in Retailing 8
MSCA 677 Seminar in Sustainability in Marketing 9
Notes:
Students who have received credit for the Seminar in Qualitative Research under a MSCA 672 number may not take MSCA 662 for credit.
Students who have received credit for the Seminar in Consumer Research Methodology under a MSCA 672 number may not take MSCA 663 for credit
Students who have received credit for the Seminar in Consumer Psychology and Decision Making under a MSCA 672 number may not take MSCA 667 for credit
Students who have received credit for the Seminar in Pricing Management under a MSCA 672 number may not take MSCA 669 for credit
Students who have received credit for the Seminar in Relationship Marketing Strategy under a MSCA 672 number may not take MSCA 671 for credit
Students who have received credit for the Seminar in Segmentation and Positioning in Marketing may not take MSCA 673 for credit
Students who have received credit for the Seminar in Brand Management under a MSCA 672 number may not take MSCA 674 for credit
Students who have received credit for the Seminar in Research in Retailing under a MSCA 672 number may not take MSCA 675 for credit
Students who have received credit for the Seminar in Sustainability in Marketing under a MSCA 672 number may not take MSCA 677 for credit
* Subject matter will vary from term to term and students may take more than one of these courses, provided that course content has changed.
MSCA 602 Applied Linear Statistical Models
The course focuses on systematic treatments of linear statistical models for regression, analysis of variance and experimental design with special emphasis on applications in business and economics. Topics include regression analysis: inference, model building, diagnostics, remedial measures and validation; single-factor and two-factor ANOVA models, and analysis of covariance. Other statistical tools for specialized applications discussed may include logistic regression, path analysis and time series regression. Case studies are employed to illustrate tools for fitting, checking, validating and interpreting linear models.
MSCA 615 Research Methodology - Administrative Sciences
This seminar provides a basic understanding of the research process and a knowledge of the methods used in the design and execution of scientific research relevant to social sciences, and specifically the business context. The seminar helps students to develop skills needed to assess the feasibility and potential contribution of proposed studies, and to critically evaluate research reported by others. The application of relevant research methods are reviewed through discussions of exemplary articles published in leading journals. Cornerstone topics in this seminar include: theory construction, measurement, overview of data collection methods, reliability, as well as internal and external validity issues.
Note: Students who have taken MSCA 612, MSCA 613 or MSCA 614 may not take this seminar for credit.
MSCA 699 Research Thesis (21 credits)
The MSc thesis is intended to provide candidates with an opportunity to carry out an investigation in-depth in a particular area of interest and to make a contribution to knowledge in the area. It is expected that the thesis will include a comprehensive and critical synthesis of the relevant literature and will also embody either a theoretical contribution to knowledge, a rigorous empirical investigation or both.
A Thesis Committee consists of a faculty member from the department as supervisor and two other faculty members. An Examining Committee consists of the Thesis Committee and a Thesis Examination Chair appointed by the Associate Dean, Research and Research Programs in accordance with the thesis regulations specified in the relevant section of this calendar.
MBA Option for Diploma in Chartered Professional Accountancy Students. Students in good academic standing who meet the admission requirements of the MBA Program, and who have completed the requirements for the Diploma in Chartered Professional Accountancy Program within the last five years, may be granted advanced standing for up to 21 credits upon admission to the MBA Program and will be required to take the following courses (24 credits):
MBA 640 On Ramp (0 credits)
MBA 641 Responsible Manager (3 credits)
MBA 644 Marketing Management (3 credits)
MBA 645 Economics for Organizational Decision Making (3 credits)
MBA 647 Managing People in Organizations (3 credits)
MBA 650 Crafting and Implementing Successful Strategies (3 credits)
+3 electives
MBA Option for Diploma in Chartered Accountancy Students. Students in good academic standing who meet the admission requirements of the MBA Program, and who have completed the requirements for the Diploma in Chartered Accountancy Program within the last five years, may be granted advanced standing for up to 21 credits upon admission to the MBA Program and will be required to take the following courses(24 credits):
MBA 640 On Ramp (0 credits)
MBA 641 Responsible Manager (3 credits)
MBA 644 Marketing Management (3 credits)
MBA 645 Economics for Organizational Decision Making (3 credits)
MBA 647   Managing People in Organizations (3 credits)
MBA 650 Crafting and Implementing Successful Strategies (3 credits)
+ 3 electives
MBA Option for Graduate Certificate in Management Accounting Students. Students in good academic standing who meet the admission requirements of the MBA Program, and who have completed the requirements for the Graduate Certificate in Management Accountancy Program within the last five years, may be granted advanced standing for up to 15 credits upon admission to the MBA Program and will be required to take the following courses (30 credits):
MBA 640 On Ramp (0 credits)
MBA 641 Responsible Manager (3 credits)
MBA 643 Managerial analytics (3 credits)
MBA 644 Marketing Management (3 credits)
MBA 645 Economics for Organizational Decision Making (3 credits)
MBA 647 Managing People in Organizations (3 credits)
MBA 648 Business Process Management (3 credits)
MBA 650 Crafting and Implementing Successful Strategies (3 credits)
+ 3 electives
Academic Regulations
Course Load for Full-time Students. The course load for a full-time student is a minimum of 12 credits of course work per term. Students can accelerate their progress by taking courses in the Summer term.
Course Load for Part-time Students. The normal course load for a part-time student is a minimum of 12 credits per calendar year. A part-time student may not, without permission, register for more than 6 credits in each of the Fall and Winter terms, but may accelerate their progress in the program by taking courses in the Summer term.
Change of Status. Students may be granted permission to change their status from part-time to full-time or vice-versa. If a change is permitted, the student’s program time limit will be adjusted accordingly.
Course Load Reduction. In exceptional circumstances, students may be granted permission to reduce their course load below the normal specified in paragraphs 1 and 2 above, while remaining in good standing. Full-time students completing less than 9 credits per term will be reclassified as part-time, and must comply with the course load requirements for part-time students, specified in paragraph 2 above.
Part-time students with a reduced course load must complete a minimum of 9 credits per year, including the Summer term. Full- and part-time students who have been granted such permission will be subject to specific conditions, as outlined in the section on Academic Standing.
Program and Course Withdrawal. Students who wish to apply for withdrawal from the MBA program must do so in writing at the MBA Program office. Students may drop a course up to the end of the course change period. (This is normally about two weeks after classes begin – see Academic Calendar.) Application to drop a course must be made in writing at the MBA Program office. Students should bear in mind the minimum and maximum course load regulations specified above, when dropping or adding courses.
Academic Standing. Please refer to the Academic Standing section of the Calendar for a detailed review of the Academic Regulations.
Business Communication Skills. All students in the MBA Program must demonstrate a high level of competence in written and oral communications. A strong managerial communications component has been designed into a number of MBA courses to help students evaluate and develop their skills in this area. Students who exhibit deficiencies in communication skills will be expected to obtain appropriate assistance through designated courses, workshops or individual tutorial support.
Cognate Courses. Subject to the approval of the MBA Program Director and the departments concerned, MBA students are permitted to choose courses from those offered by other programs within the John Molson School of Business or from courses offered by other Faculties. A maximum of 12 credits can be selected from courses outside the John Molson School of Business.
Graduation Requirement. In order to graduate, students must have a cumulative GPA of 2.70 or better.
Program Structure
Qualifying Courses
Normally, students who require qualifying courses will have to complete them during the first term of their program of study.
COMM 610 Basic Quantitative Skills for Administration (1.5 credits)
This course revisits and strengthens the basic algebra and statistics skills presented in MBA 640. The course uses a combination of online lectures and workshops and in person tutorials to develop and apply these skills to different business problems. Assessment is carried out via assignments and a final exam.
Notes:
Students who have received credit for COMM 500 or COMM 600 may not take this course for credit.
COMM 610 must be successfully completed in the first term of the MBA Program.
Courses in the John Molson MBA Program
After successfully completing the qualifying course (if necessary), students in the MBA Programcomplete 45 credits comprising the core courses and electives. Full-time students will normally complete the program within two years of their first registration.
The purpose of these core courses is to provide an integrated and rigorous body of functionally oriented skills and knowledge as a foundation for the electives.
Core Courses (30 credits)
MBA 640 On Ramp (0 credits, pass/fail)
MBA 641 Responsible Manager (3 credits)
MBA 642 Financial Reporting for Responsible Decision Making (3 credits)
MBA 643 Managerial Analytics (3 credits)
MBA 644 Marketing Management (3 credits)
MBA 645 Economics for Organizational Decision Making (3 credits)
MBA 646 Financial Management (3 credits)
MBA 647 Managing People in Organizations (3 credits)
MBA 648 Business Process Management (3 credits)
MBA 649 Strategic Managerial Accounting and Control (3 credits)
MBA 650 Crafting and Implementing Successful Strategies (3 credits)
MBA 640 On Ramp (0 credits)
The On Ramp provides students with the essential tools and basic quantitative skills needed to succeed in the MBA Program and must be completed prior to starting the program. The On Ramp is comprised of two modules: fundamental MBA survival skills and quantitative skills. The quantitative skills module reviews and tests the essential quantitative skills needed prior to starting the program. At the end of the On Ramp, students' quantitative skills are assessed via an examination. Unsuccessful students are required to complete COMM 610 in addition to the regular program requirements. COMM 610 must be successfully completed in the first term of the MBA program. This course is evaluated on a pass/fail basis.
MBA 641 Responsible Manager (3 credits)
Prerequisites: MBA 640 or COMM 610 concurrently.
This introductory course focuses on management, organizations and society. Students reflect on who managers are and what they do, and understand how their work is vital in all the functions of the organization. Taking a multi-level approach acknowledging the individual, organizational, and societal impacts of business, this course critically explores ethical behavior, corporate responsibility and stakeholder engagement. Students develop a more nuanced understanding of what it means to be a responsible manager and the role of business as a vibrant and important actor in society. The pedagogical method is primarily through case analysis.
Notes:
Students are expected to complete MBA 641 in their first term.
Students who have received credit for MBA 691 may not take this course for credit.
MBA 642 Financial Reporting for Responsible Decision Making (3 credits)
Prerequisite: MBA 640 or COMM 610 concurrently.
This course provides an overview of the corporate external financial reporting system. It examines the role played by management, creditors, investors and auditors. The legal environment for enforcing accounting standards is also studied. As financial reporting helps various decision makers allocate resources to the most profitable and socially responsible ventures, annual reports’ comparability is analyzed under existing International and U.S. reporting standards. The pedagogical approach used in this course is based on lectures, case analyses and the discussion of current professional issues, such as triple bottom line accounting and the detection of accounting fraud.
Note: Students who have received credit for MBA 607 may not take this course for credit.
MBA 643 Managerial Analytics (3 credits)
Prerequisites: MBA 640 or COMM 610; MBA 641 previously or concurrently.
This course emphasizes the development of analytical skills needed to work effectively in a business environment. It introduces the basics of knowledge discovery from big data, business analytics and predictive modeling for data driven decision making and policy formation. Topics include exploratory data analysis, statistical analysis and modeling, forecasting and data visualization. Practical usages of the methodologies are demonstrated via projects and case analysis based on big data from various functional areas of business.
Note: Students who have reveived credit for MBA 608 may not take this course for credit.
MBA 644 Marketing Management (3 credits)
Prerequisite: MBA 641 previously or concurrently.
This course focuses on the strategic role of marketing for firms by cultivating marketing management perspectives and skills. Attention is directed toward demonstrating how a manager can use information in micro and macro environments to develop marketing strategies for consumer value creation that integrate product, pricing, promotion, and distribution in order to obtain and maintain a sustainable competitive advantage. Both online and offline aspects of marketing strategies are incorporated to reflect the current environment. Through the use of lectures, case discussions and application-oriented readings, the requisite mindset is nurtured to facilitate marketing excellence in today's multi-faceted and dynamic business environment.
Note: Students who have received credit for MBA 610 may not take this course for credit.
MBA 645: Economics for Organizational Decision Making (3 credits)
Prerequisites: MBA 640 or COMM 610; MBA 641 previously or concurrently.
This course applies the principles and methodologies of economics to the analysis of the global economy and its impact on the domestic business landscape. Students learn how domestic and foreign fiscal and monetary policies influence the performance of national economies through the study of macroeconomic factors such as exchange rates, interest rates, inflation and trade barriers. By the end of the course, students have developed a framework that allows them to identify and assess the systemic risks and opportunities facing any organization. Pedagogical methods may include lectures, cases and/or projects.
Note: Students who have received credit for MBA 618 may not take this course for credit.
MBA 646 Financial Management (3 credits)
Prerequisites: MBA 640 or COMM 610, MBA 642.
This course develops the tools and theories necessary for sound financial and risk management decisions. The core concepts of opportunity cost, risk and return are applied to the practical problems facing financial managers in large and small enterprises.  Specific topics explored in depth include time value of money, security and option valuation, capital budgeting and cost of capital, liquidity management, corporate governance and performance evaluation. Pedagogical tools including lectures, cases/simulations, discussions and applied research are used to present and critique standard and best practices in financial decision making.
Note: Students who have received credit for MBA 614 may not take this course for credit.
MBA 647 Managing People in Organizations (3 credits)
Prerequisite: MBA 640 or COMM 610; MBA 641.
Managing people in today’s organizations requires managers to understand the relationship of and between individual, team, and organizational goals. This course informs students about core concepts that help to explain and predict how people behave in organizations, including discussions of perception, motivation, team dynamics, conflict, stress management, leadership, and change.  Students also learn the science behind selected and critical Human Resource Management practices, including how to train and develop employees, and how to evaluate their performance. Through a combination of lectures and activities (e.g. case discussions, experiential exercises, and projects), students develop the interpersonal, communication, and decision-making skills necessary to manage people effectively and ethically in a diverse and fast-paced business context.
Note: Students who have received credit for MBA 609 may not take this course for credit.
MBA 648 Business Process Management (3 credits)
Prerequisite: MBA 640 or COMM 610, MBA 641.
Business Process Management plays a central role in achieving competitive advantage in terms of quality, price, customer services and product variety. The focus is on improving the performance of core operations by optimally allocating scarce resources. Managerial and analytical tools are studied in improving business processes. The course covers operational issues such as demand management, resource planning, inventory management and quality management. Through case discussion, analysis and spreadsheet modelling, this course provides a hands-on approach to operations management.
Note: Students who have received credit for MBA 616 may not take this course for credit.
MBA 649 Strategic Managerial Accounting and Control (3 credits)
Prerequisites: MBA 640 or COMM 610, MBA 641. MBA 642,
This course focuses on the analytical techniques deployed to assist management in the design, implementation, and monitoring of the organization’s strategy. It also covers techniques, which support the ensuing corrective decision-making. Topics covered include: planning, capital budgeting, master budget, break-even point, differential analysis, product costing, etc. For management control: decentralization systems, transfer pricing, flexible budgets, standard costs and variance analysis, etc. The course uses the case method in both for-profit and not-for-profit organizations.
Note: Students who have received credit for MBA 628 may not take this course for credit.
MBA 650 Crafting and Implementing Successful Strategies (3 credits)
Prerequisites: MBA 641, 644, 645, 646.
The important issues involved in developing strategy in various business sectors are the focus of the course. Students learn to formulate strategies that clearly state the successful and sustainable path for companies. The course also looks at winning strategies defining how companies can compete against their rivals and cooperate with partners in specific business sectors. Students study strategy implementation and examine how functional strategies can be key instruments for business success. The course also looks at the relationship between strategy, culture and structure of the organization. Pedagogical methods focus primarily on cases and projects.
Note: Students who have received credit for MBA 622 may not take this course for credit.
Electives
Elective Courses
Some of these courses may not be available in a given academic year. Special Topics courses are offered by most departments. Detailed information as to availability and content may be obtained from the MBA Program Office.
List of Elective Courses
In addition to the elective courses listed below, MBA students may also take courses in the JMSB MSc programs, or graduate courses offered outside the John Molson School of Business, subject to approval by the MBA Program Director.
Electives: MBA courses
MBA 651 MBA Research Paper (6 credits)
MBA 652 MBA Internship (3 credits)
MBA 654 MBA Reading course
MBA 655 International Case Competition Organizer (6 credits)
MBA 656 International Case Competition – Executive Assistant, Special Projects (6 credits)
MBA 657 International Case Competition – Executive Assistant (3 credits)
MBA 658 Case Competition Organizer (3 credits)
MBA 659 Strategies in Action (Case competition) (3 credits)
MBA 660 Small Business Consulting Bureau (3 credits)
MBA 661 JMSB/MBA Community Services Initiative (3 credits)
MBA 695 Seminar in Special Topics (*) (3 credits)
Notes:
Students who have received credit  for MBA 631 may not take MBA  651 or MBA 655 or MBA 656 for credit.
Students who have received credit for MBA 632 may not take MBA 657 for credit.
Students have received credit for MBA 633 may not take MBA 652 for credit.
Students have received credit for MANA 691 may not take MBA 659 for credit.
Students who have received  credit  for the topic Small Business Consulting Bureau under an MBA 695 number may not take MBA 660 for credit.
Students who have received credit for the topic JMSB/MBA Community Services Initiative under an MBA 695 number may not take MBA 661 for credit.
Accountancy
ACCO 691 Seminar in Business Valuations
ACCO 692 Tax Planning and Decision Making for Managers
ACCO 695 Seminar in Special Topics (*)
Note: Students who have received credit for the topic Tax Planning and Decision Making for Managers under an ACCO 695 number may not take ACCO 692 for credit.
Supply Chain and Business Technology Management
BTM 660 Project Management
BTM 633 Strategic Management of Information Technology
BSTA 645 Statistical Software for Data Management and Analysis
BSTA 677 Business Forecasting
BSTA 678 Data Mining Techniques
SCOM 610 Supply Chain Management
BTM 695 Seminar in Special Topics (*)
Notes:
Students who have received credit for DESC 660 may not take BTM 660 for credit.
Students who have received credit for MBA 615 may not take BTM 633 for credit.
Students who have received credit for the topic Statistical Software for Data Management and Analysis under a DESC 695 number may not take BSTA 645 for credit.
Students who have received credit for DESC 677 may not take BSTA 677 for credit.
Students who have received credit for the topic Data Mining Techniques under a DESC 695 number may not take BSTA 678 for credit.
Students who have received credit for the topic Supply Chain Management under a DESC 695 number may not take SCOM 610 for credit.
Finance
FINA 663 Seminar in Corporate Finance
FINA 664 Private Equity
FINA 665 Mergers and Acquisitions
FINA 682 Seminar in International Financial Management
FINA 683 Seminar in Portfolio Management
FINA 685 Seminar in Options and Futures
FINA 687 Seminar in Derivatives and Risk Management
FINA 688 Financial Risk Management
FINA 690 Investment Analysis
FINA 691 Seminar in Real Estate Finance
FINA 695 Seminar in Special Topics (*)
Notes:
Students who have received credit for the topic Venture Capital under a FINA 695 number may not take FINA 664 for credit.
Students who have received credit for the topic Mergers and Acquisitions under a FINA 695 number may not take FINA 665 for credit.
Students who have received credit for  the topic Financial Risk Management under a FINA 695 number may not take FINA 688 for credit.
Management
MANA 659 Executing Strategies
MANA 664 Seminar in Corporate Law
MANA 665 Management of Change
MANA 667 Corporate Governance
MANA 668 Sustainable Business Strategy
MANA 670 Management Consulting
MANA 681 Seminar in the Management of International Business
MANA 682 Seminar in Human Resources Management
MANA 683 Seminar in Entrepreneurship and Small Business
MANA 695 Seminar in Special Topics (*)
Notes:
Students who have received credit for the topic Management of Change under a MANA 695 number may not take MANA 665 for credit.
Students who have received credit for the topic Corporate Governance under a MANA 695 number may not take MANA 667 for credit.
Students who have received credit for the topic Sustainable Business Strategy under a MANA 695 number may not take MANA 668 for credit.
Students who have received credit for the topic Introduction to Management Consulting under a MANA 695 number may not take MANA 670 for credit.
Marketing
MARK 671 Seminar in Consumer Behaviour
MARK 672 Seminar in Strategic Marketing
MARK 673 Social Media Marketing
MARK 674 Integrated Marketing Communications
MARK 691 Seminar in Pharmaceutical Marketing
MARK 695 Seminar in Special Topics (*)
Notes:
Students who have received credit for the topic Social Media Marketing under a MARK 695 number may not take MARK 673 for credit.
Students who have received credit for the topic Integrated Marketing Communications under a MARK 695 number may not take MARK 674 for credit.
(*) Subject matter will vary from term to term and students may take more than one of these courses, provided that course content has changed.
MBA Co-operative Option
The MBA Co-operative Option is non-credit and is offered to all students who are enrolled in the John Molson MBA Program. Students accepted into the Co-op must be registered as full-time, have completed 24 credits, and maintain a cumulative GPA of 3.30 or better.
Students may do a minimum of one work term (four months) to a maximum of three work terms (twelve months). Students must return to full-time study for their last term.
MSCA 602: Applied Linear Statistical Models (3 credits)
MSCA 615: Research Methodology - Administrative Sciences (3 credits)
15 credits of Supply Chain Management seminars:
MSCM 681: Advanced Modelling and Optimization (3 credits)
MSCM 682: Sourcing and Global Logistics (3 credits)
MSCM 683: Supply Chain Design and Coordination (3 credits)
MSCM 684: Demand Management (3 credits)
MSCM 685: Supply Chain Risk Management (3 credits)
9 credits of elective seminars: (see Elective Seminars)
15 credits: MSCM 689: Applied Research Project
Academic Regulations
Credit Load: Full-time Students. The normal course load for full-time students is 12 credits in each of the terms in the first year; 6 credits and the 15-credit applied research project in the second year.
Credit Load: Part-time Students. The maximum course load for part-time students is 12 credits per calendar year. The 15-credit applied research project should take 6 to 12 months to complete.
Course Reduction. In exceptional circumstances, students may be granted permission to reduce their course load below the normal specified above while remaining in good standing.
Program and Course Withdrawal. Students who wish to apply for withdrawal from the program must do so in writing at the office of the Associate Dean, Research and Research Programs. Students may drop a course up to the end of the course change period. This is normally about two weeks after classes begin (see Academic Calendar). In addition to the regulations which appear in the Graduate Registration section of the Graduate Calendar, students enrolled in the program are required to observe the following rules.
Academic Standing. Please refer to the Academic Standing section of the Calendar for a detailed review of the Academic Regulations.
Time Limit.  Please refer to the Academic Regulation page for further details regarding the Time Limit requirements.
Graduation Requirement. In order to graduate, students must have a minimum cumulative GPA of 2.70.
Elective Seminars
Taking an elective seminar is subject to the academic advisor’s approval. Each year a selection of specialized seminars are offered on a rotating basis from those listed below.
MSCA 625 Seminar in Options and Futures
MSCA 632 Seminar in Special Topics in Finance
MSCA 645 Seminar in Organizational Theory and Design
MSCA 647 Seminar in Strategic Management in Global Context
MSCA 652 Seminar in Special Topics in Management
MSCA 668 Seminar in Innovation and Marketing
MSCA 672 Seminar in Special Topics in Marketing
At most one elective seminar at the graduate level can be taken outside of JMSB.
Qualifying Program
Up to three qualifying program courses are taken by those students who do not have a Supply Chain Management or Industrial Engineering degree. These courses are specified at the time of admission by the Admissions Committee, based on the academic background of the student. The qualifying program courses need to be successfully completed prior to starting the regular master program.
Course Descriptions
Core Seminars
MSCA 602 Applied Linear Statistical Models
The course focuses on systematic treatments of linear statistical models for regression, analysis of variance and experimental design with special emphasis on applications in business and economics. Topics include regression analysis: inference, model building, diagnostics, remedial measures and validation; single-factor and two-factor ANOVA models, and analysis of covariance. Other statistical tools for specialized applications discussed may include logistic regression, path analysis and time series regression. Case studies are employed to illustrate tools for fitting, checking, validating and interpreting linear models.
MSCA 615 Research Methodology - Administrative Sciences
This seminar provides a basic understanding of the research process and a knowledge of the methods used in the design and execution of scientific research relevant to social sciences, and specifically the business context. The seminar helps students to develop skills needed to assess the feasibility and potential contribution of proposed studies, and to critically evaluate research reported by others. The application of relevant research methods are reviewed through discussions of exemplary articles published in leading journals. Cornerstone topics in this seminar include: theory construction, measurement, overview of data collection methods, reliability, as well as internal and external validity issues.
Note: Students who have taken MSCA 612, MSCA 613 or MSCA 614 may not take this seminar for credit.
Supply Chain Management Seminars
MSCM 681 Advanced Modelling and Optimization
This seminar emphasizes the theoretical and practical aspects of advanced optimization modelling techniques in supply chain planning. Among the topics covered are network optimization, non-linear programming, stochastic programming, Markov processes and application of duality in developing decomposition-based solution approaches for large linear and integer models. Use of commercial modelling platform and optimization software are an integral part of this seminar.
MSCM 682 Sourcing and Global Logistics
This seminar covers the practices, techniques and regulations associated with sourcing and movement of materials in the global supply chains. Among the topics covered on sourcing are impact of globalization on sourcing, supplier evaluation and selection, supplier performance management, purchasing, electronic procurement, negotiations, contract law, supplier relationship management. Issues in global logistics are discussed in the second half of the seminar. Among the topics covered are distribution channels, warehousing, transportation management, reverse logistics, green logistics and sustainability, and cross-border issues in logistics. The coverage is supplemented by case studies and research articles.
MSCM 683 Supply Chain Design and Coordination
Prerequisite: MSCM 681 or equivalent.
This seminar focuses on managerial and modelling issues in supply chain design and coordination along the supply chain. Models in facility location, distribution networks and global supply chain networks are studied. The strategic aspects of supply chain design are discussed in terms of competitive drivers. The second part of the seminar deals with coordination issues. Among the concepts and models covered in this respect are supply chain contracts, collaborative planning, forecasting and replenishment, bullwhip effect, postponement, and vendor managed inventory. Articles, case studies, optimization software and simulation game are used as part of seminar delivery.
MSCM 684 Demand Management
The seminar presents advanced forecasting tools that assist market analysis, revenue management tools that optimize operational performance and approaches in building flexibilities to enhance manufacturing and organizational capabilities. Among the topics covered are advanced forecasting models, judgmental forecasting and adjustment, customer relationship management, consumer choice models, dynamic pricing, capacity control, network revenue management, manufacturing and organizational flexibilities. The seminar content is delivered via a combination of lectures, case analyses and research articles.
MSCM 685 Supply Chain Risk Management
Prerequisite: MSCM 681 or equivalent.
Strategies for managing the various risks along the supply chain are studied. Quantitative and qualitative approaches used in analyzing such risks and scenarios are covered. The seminar discusses risk identification and management, trade-offs in risk management, strategies for robustness, scenario planning, financial risks and disruption planning. The approaches used for modelling and analyzing the supply chain risks are presented through lectures, case analyses and research articles.
MSCM 689 Applied Research Project
Prerequisite: at least nine credits of MSCM seminars.
Supervised (co-supervised) by a faculty member(s), the applied research project is carried out individually or by a group of two students, depending on the overall requirements and the extent of the project to be conducted. The project involves working on a real-life supply chain management problem provided by a company. Once the problem is defined, the students prepare an overall project management plan to tackle the problem within a given time limit. The various stages of the project involve, among others: literature review, defining data and information requirements for problem analysis, gathering data, designing the appropriate model, conducting experimental design runs and sensitivity analyses, and presenting the solution(s) with an implementation plan. The project outcome is expected to have both academic and business merit. For projects done in groups of two students, there is a significant individual evaluation component in assessing the work done by each student.
GDBA 530 Business Data Analytics (3 credits)
This course provides students with the skills and knowledge needed to analyze business data. Using spreadsheet software throughout the course, students learn to summarize and describe data with charts, graphs and numbers, to visualize and measure relationships in data and acquire the ability to make inferences and predictions. Students acquire a working knowledge of the statistical tools and techniques required for better decision making. The course combines lecturing with actual business applications and class discussions aimed at encouraging critical thinking, analytical skills and ethical manipulation and reporting of data.
Note 1: Students who have successfully completed a statistics course in a previous program with a minimum grade of “B” may be exempt from taking GDBA 530 with the permission of the Program Director. In this case, the course must be substituted with an elective.
Note 2: Students who have received credit for GDBA 502 may not take this course for credit.
GDBA 531 Professional Business Skills (3 credits)
This course provides students with the necessary skills that help with successful interaction with others in business settings. Topics include designing and delivering effective written and oral messages from concept to delivery, working in groups, and negotiating and resolving conflict by using ethical communication tactics. Pedagogical methods include group-based work, in-class workshops, case studies, presentations and report writing.
GDBA 532 Accounting (3 credits)
This course surveys financial and managerial accounting from the point of view of the users of financial information. Financial accounting topics include the framework of financial accounting, the analysis of transactions, and the preparation and analysis of financial statements. Topics in management accounting are budgeting and control, costing and cost allocation, the cost-volume-profit planning model, and short-term and long-term decision making in business. The ethical dimensions of accounting are explored throughout the course. Pedagogical methods include lectures, exercises, case studies and class discussions.
Note: Students who have received credit for GDBA 501 may not take this course for credit.
GDBA 533 Managing People in Organizations (3 credits)
Prerequisites: GDBA 531 previously or concurrently.
This course is concerned with understanding and managing individual and group behaviour in organizations. It examines themes such as personality, motivation, emotions, leadership, ethics, and group dynamics and how they relate to the role of managers in organizations. The course covers these topics in an integrated manner so as to prepare students to become effective managers. Pedagogical methods include in-class exercises and case studies.
Note: Students who have received credit for GDBA 503 may not take this course for credit.
GDBA 534 Marketing Management (3 credits)
Prerequisites: GDBA 531 previously or concurrently.
This course is designed to provide students with the necessary skills to develop a marketing plan.  Topics include micro- and macro-level environmental analysis, customer behaviour, market segmentation, value generating practices and developing a complete marketing plan. Pedagogical methods include lectures, case studies and in-class presentations.
Note: Students who have received credit for GDBA 504 may not take this course for credit.
GDBA 535 Finance (3 credits)
Prerequisites: GDBA 530 previously or concurrently, and 532.
This course provides students with a general understanding of the fundamental concepts of finance as they apply to financial management and investment analysis.  Building on the objective of firm value maximization, students learn to describe and value risky financial securities and long-term capital projects as well as to manage the firm’s short-term financial planning and decisions. Pedagogical methods include exercises, cases, simulations and class discussions.
Note: Students who have received credit for GDBA 505 may not take this course for credit.
GDBA 536 Operations Management (3 credits)
Prerequisites: GDBA 530 previously or concurrently.
This course provides students with the quantitative and qualitative techniques to achieve efficient and effective utilization of scarce resources in business. Topics include planning, management and control of labour, machinery, material, money, information and time resources in manufacturing and service sectors. Recent developments in these areas are introduced within the context of manufacturing and service strategies. The course uses class discussion, case analysis and simulation to illustrate key concepts and practices in operations management. The interactions with other functional areas, such as information systems, marketing, accounting and finance are discussed through case studies.
Note: Students who have received credit for GDBA 506 may not take this course for credit.
GDBA 537 Managerial Economics (3 credits)
Prerequisites: GDBA 530 previously or concurrently.
This course introduces the principles of economics.  The emphasis is on the role of the decision maker who has to identify and implement profitable decisions.  The course applies economic reasoning to business problems including bargaining, adverse selection, moral hazard, and incentive alignment. Pedagogical methods include exercises, cases and class discussions.
Note: Students who have received credit for GDBA 507 may not take this course for credit.
GDBA 538 Strategic Management (3 credits)
Prerequisites: 12 credits including GDBA 530 and 531.
This capstone course provides students with an understanding of how firms gain and sustain competitive advantage in various business sectors. Specific topics include industry environment analysis, internal analysis of firm resources and capabilities, the analysis of business and corporate level strategies, and various strategic alternatives such as mergers and acquisitions, strategic alliances, and internationalization strategies. The course uses case analysis as the main approach to build abilities in strategic analysis and decision making.
GDBA 540 Entrepreneurship (3 credits)
Students conduct a market study and develop a complete business plan, including the operational, financial and marketing plan. Topics may include: transforming an idea into a business, analyzing the market and competition, and planning operations and finances for the next three to five years. Pedagogical methods include lectures, case studies, and the development of a business plan.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under GDBA 595 may not take this course for credit.
GDBA 541 Business Law (3 credits)
Students learn the basic principles of the Quebec legal system, the various methods available to start a new business and how to select the most appropriate form of business. Students also learn basic legal notions relating to contracts, civil liability and employment law allowing them to better understand these legal principles in the context of operating a business.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under GDBA 595 may not take this course for credit.
GDBA 590 Special Topics in Accountancy (3 credits)
Note: Students who have received credit for the same topic under GDBA 595 may not take this course for credit.
GDBA 591 Special Topics in Finance (3 credits)
Note: Students who have received credit for the same topic under GDBA 595 may not take this course for credit.
GDBA 592 Special Topics in Management (3 credits)
Note: Students who have received credit for the same topic under GDBA 595 may not take this course for credit.
GDBA 593 Special Topics in Marketing (3 credits)
Note: Students who have received credit for the same topic under GDBA 595 may not take this course for credit.
GDBA 594 Special Topics in Supply Chain and Business Technology Management (3 credits)
Note: Students who have received credit for the same topic under GDBA 595 may not take this course for credit.
GDBA 595 Special Topics (3 credits)
Special topics for this course are stated in the Class Schedule.
ACCO 650 Financial Reporting in Practice (4 credits)
The objective of this course is for the student to demonstrate a high level of competency in many financial accounting and reporting issues, within alternative accounting frameworks. Students are also introduced to the integration of several other competencies, including taxation and finance which help develop the student’s understanding of the implications of financial statement preparation on their users.
Note: Students who have taken ACCO 612 and ACCO 643 may not take this course for credit.
ACCO 651 Financial Reporting: Comprehensive Applications (4 credits)
In conjunction with ACCO 650, this course covers several additional complex issues in financial accounting and reporting, within alternative accounting frameworks. Students apply these financial accounting and reporting competencies, along with other competencies, in a case context.
Note: Students who have taken ACCO 613 may not take this course for credit.
ACCO 652 Business Advisory Services (4 credits)
Prerequisite: ACCO 650.
This course is designed to develop competencies in management decision making, finance, strategy and risk management. Emphasis is placed on strategy formulation, implementation and monitoring using case analysis.
Note: Students who have taken ACCO 631 may not take this course for credit.
ACCO 653 Information Systems and Internal Control (4 credits)
Prerequisites: ACCO 650, 651.
In conjunction with ACCO 652, this course is designed to develop skills in corporate governance with emphasis on the competencies required to build good internal control systems and to assess its impact on financial reporting.
Note: Students who have taken ACCO 678 may not take this course for credit.
ACCO 658 Capstone I Seminar (2 credits)
Prerequisites: ACCO 650, 651, 652, 653 and two elective courses.
This course is designed to enhance the development of the student as a strategic thinker. The course builds on all previously acquired competencies. The content, structure and delivery of the course are designed to develop the strategic leadership capabilities of the student and ensure an integrative perspective is brought to decision making. The course combines individual and group work, in both written assignments and oral presentations.
Note: There is a surcharge for this course.
ACCO 659 Capstone II Examination Preparation (4 credits)
Co-rerequisite: ACCO 658.
In this course, the students work individually to solve complex and highly integrative cases that simulate real-life business issues. The course draws on all competencies acquired throughout the CPA program and is designed specifically for students intending to write the CPA Canada Common Final Examination (CFE).
Note: There is a surcharge for this course.
Elective Courses
Students must choose two of the following four courses, depending on their interests and career aspirations. Students who plan to practice public accounting must take ACCO 654 and ACCO 655.
ACCO 654 Assurance and Professional Practice (4 credits)
Prerequisites: ACCO 650, 651, 653.
The objective of this course is to develop the competencies necessary to perform both internal audit projects and external assurance engagements. Students use cases to assess the kind of engagement required, to develop and perform procedures, and to document and report results obtained from a risk-based perspective.
Note: Students who have taken ACCO 635 may not take this course for credit.
ACCO 655 Taxation and Decision Making (4 credits)
Prerequisites: ACCO 650, 651.
This course is designed to develop competencies necessary to provide a broad range of taxation services and advice to individuals, corporations, partnerships and trusts, in compliance with tax laws and regulations. Students develop additional knowledge of the relationship between financial reporting decisions and taxation, as well as the role of taxation in making business and investment decisions.
Note: Students who have taken ACCO 643 may not take this course for credit.
ACCO 656 Performance Management (4 credits)
Prerequisites: ACCO 652, 653.
The objective of this course is to enhance the student’s ability to assess and contribute to overall performance management, by developing and analyzing strategic decision making, supporting effective governance, managing and mitigating risk. It builds on skills developed primarily within the core courses.
ACCO 657 Financial Strategies and Decisions (4 credits)
Prerequisites: ACCO 651, 652.
In this course, students build upon finance-related material from previous courses to provide finance-related services for their organizations. To understand and communicate with other finance professionals, studentds identify, analyze, evaluate and recommend investment and financing strategies and make decisions, either individually or as part of a larger team.
Tutorial Courses
ACCO 600 Tutorial in Financial Reporting in Practice (4 credits)
Prerequisites: ACCO 650 and permission of the program director.
This course is designed to enhance the competencies of students in the program who will benefit from additional exposure to the subject matter covered in ACCO 650.
The objective is for the student to demonstrate a high level of competency in many financial accounting and reporting issues, within alternative accounting frameworks. Students are also introduced to the integration of several other competencies, including taxation and finance which help develop the student’s understanding of the implications of financial statement preparation on their users. This course is evaluated on the same basis as ACCO 650, in the term the course is taken.
Note: Students who have taken ACCO 650T may not take this course for credit.
ACCO 601 Tutorial in Financial Reporting: Comprehensive Applications (4 credits)
Prerequisites: ACCO 651 and permission of the program director.
TThis course is designed to enhance the competencies of students in the program who will benefit from additional exposure to the subject matter covered in ACCO 651. In conjunction with ACCO 650, this course covers several additional complex issues in financial accounting and reporting, within alternative accounting frameworks. Students apply these financial accounting and reporting competencies, along with other competencies, in a case context. This course is evaluated on the same basis as ACCO 651, in the term the course is taken.
Note: Students who have taken ACCO 651T may not take this course for credit.
ACCO 602 Tutorial in Business Advisory Services (4 credits)
Prerequisites: ACCO 652 and permission of the program director.
This course is designed to enhance the competencies of students in the program who will benefit from additional exposure to the subject matter covered in ACCO 652. Students develop competencies in management decision making, finance, strategy and risk management. Emphasis is placed on strategy formulation, implementation and monitoring using case analysis. This course is evaluated on the same basis as ACCO 652, in the term the course was taken.
Note: Students who have taken ACCO 652T may not take this course for credit.
ACCO 603 Tutorial in Information Systems and Internal Control (4 credits)
Prerequisites: ACCO 653 and permission of the program director.
This course is designed to enhance the competencies of students in the program who will benefit from additional exposure to the subject matter covered in ACCO 653. In conjunction with ACCO 652, this course develops skills in corporate governance with emphasis on the competencies required to build good internal control systems and to assess its impact on financial reporting. This course is evaluated on the same basis as ACCO 653, in the term the course is taken.
Note: Students who have taken ACCO 653T may not take this course for credit.
ACCO 604 Tutorial in Assurance and Professional Practice (4 credits)
Prerequisites: ACCO 654 and permission of the program director.
This course is designed to enhance the competencies of students in the program who will benefit from additional exposure to the subject matter covered in ACCO 654. The objective is to develop the competencies necessary to perform both internal audit projects and external assurance engagements. Students use cases to assess the kind of engagement required, to develop and perform procedures, and to document and report results obtained from a risk-based perspective. This course is evaluated on the same basis as ACCO 654, in the term the course is taken.
Note: Students who have taken ACCO 654T may not take this course for credit.
ACCO 605 Tutorial in Taxation and Decision Making (4 credits)
Prerequisites: ACCO 655 and permission of the program director.
This course is designed to enhance the competencies of students in the program who will benefit from additional exposure to the subject matter covered in ACCO 655. Included are the competencies necessary to provide a broad range of taxation services and advice to individuals, corporations, partnerships and trusts, in compliance with tax laws and regulations. Students develop additional knowledge of the relationship between financial reporting decisions and taxation, as well as the role of taxation in making business and investment decisions. This course is evaluated on the same basis as ACCO 655, in the term the course is taken.
Note: Students who have taken ACCO 655T may not take this course for credit.
ACCO 606 Tutorial in Performance Management (4 credits)
Prerequisites: ACCO 656 and permission of the program director.
This course is designed to enhance the competencies of students in the program who will benefit from additional exposure to the subject matter covered in ACCO 656. The objective is to enhance the student’s ability to assess and contribute to overall performance management, by developing and analyzing strategic decision making, supporting effective governance, managing and mitigating risk. It builds on skills developed primarily within the core courses. This course is evaluated on the same basis as ACCO 656, in the term the course is taken.
Note: Students who have taken ACCO 656T may not take this course for credit.
ACCO 607 Tutorial in Financial Strategies and Decisions (4 credits)
Prerequisites: ACCO 657 and permission of the program director.
This course is designed to enhance the competencies of students in the program who will benefit from additional exposure to the subject matter covered in ACCO 657. Students build upon finance-related material from previous courses to provide finance-related services for their organizations. To understand and communicate with other finance professionals, students identify, analyze, evaluate and recommend investment and financing strategies, and make decisions, either individually or as part of a larger team. This course is evaluated on the same basis as ACCO 657, in the term the course is taken.
Note: Students who have taken ACCO 657T may not take this course for credit.
ACCO 608 Tutorial in Capstone I Seminar (2 credits)
Prerequisites: ACCO 658 and permission of the program director.
This course is designed to enhance the competencies of students in the program who will benefit from additional exposure to the subject matter covered in ACCO 658. The objective is to develop the student as a strategic thinker and build on all previously acquired competencies. The content, structure and delivery of the course are designed to develop the strategic leadership capabilities of the student and ensure an integrative perspective is brought to decision making. The course combines individual and group work, in both written assignments and oral presentations. This course is evaluated on the same basis as ACCO 658, in the term the course is taken.
Note 1: There is a surcharge for this course.
Note 2: Students who have taken ACCO 658T may not take this course for credit.
ACCO 609 Tutorial in Capstone II Examination Preparation (4 credits)
Prerequisites: ACCO 659 and permission of the program director.
This course is designed to enhance the competencies of students in the program who will benefit from additional exposure to the subject matter covered in ACCO 659. The students work individually to solve complex and highly integrative cases that simulate real-life business issues. The course draws on all competencies acquired throughout the CPA program and is designed specifically for students intending to write the CPA Canada Common Final Examination (CFE). This course is evaluated on the same basis as ACCO 659, in the term the course is taken.
Note 1: There is a surcharge for this course.
Note 2: Students who have taken ACCO 659T may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 610 Economics (3 credits)
This course will examine the theoretical basis and investment implications of macroeconomic and microeconomic principles, including the key components of economic activity, industrial organization, macro theory and policy, international trade, and exchange rates.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 610, MIM 610, or IMBA 610 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 611 Financial Statement Analysis I (3 credits)
This course will examine the fundamental financial statements and the impact of different accounting principles on those statements. The course will examine the treatment of such items as income taxes, inventories, depreciation, and leases from the perspective of the investment analyst. International differences in accounting standards will also be examined.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 611, MIM 611, or IMBA 611 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 613 Asset Pricing and Portfolio Management I (1.5 credits)
This course will examine the efficient markets hypothesis and introduce the classic asset pricing models (domestic and international). The key elements of the theory and practice of the portfolio management process, including investment policy, asset allocation, and client relations will be examined in the domestic and international context.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 613, MIM 613, or IMBA 613 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 614 Security Valuation in the Domestic and International Environment (3 credits)
This course will examine security (equity and fixed income) risk and valuation (for companies and industries) using alternative methodologies. The characteristics of global financial markets and the implications for security valuation will be examined. The theory and analysis of derivative securities will be introduced.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 614, MIM 614, or IMBA 614 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 615 CFA® Exam Preparation Course Level I (1.5 credits)
This course will review the material needed for the Level I CFA® exam. Successful completion of this course includes passing the CFA® Level I Exam.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 615, MIM 615, or IMBA 615 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 616 Quantitative Techniques (3 credits)
This course will examine the nature of the models used in the valuation and evaluation of investments, the theoretical and practical use of these models, comparison of classical or traditional models based on statistical analysis versus those based on more recent developments.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 612, MIM 612, IMBA 612, DIM 616, MIM 616, or IMBA 616 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 617 Corporate Finance (1.5 credits)
This module covers the theory and practice of corporate finance with emphasis on concepts such as cash flow, liquidity, leverage, cost of capital, project evaluation, and dividend policy.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 612, MIM 612, IMBA 612, DIM 617, MIM 617, or IMBA 617 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 618 Seminar in Corporate Finance (3 credits)
Prerequisite: For MIM and GIIM MBA Students: GIIM 615 or DIM 615 or MIM 615 or IMBA 615.
This course focuses on the application of modern finance theory to corporate decisions. It examines the firm’s investment and financial decisions under various economic and financial conditions. Specific topics include mergers and acquisitions, leverage buyout decisions and dividend and equity management strategies.
Note: Students who have taken MIM 618 or IMBA 618 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 619 Marketing Management (3 credits)
The main goal of this course is to develop a comprehensive understanding of the strategic role of marketing within the firm and within the Canadian context. It covers all aspects of the marketing management process. This course is designed to help develop the necessary skills to analyze market opportunities, research and select target markets, design effective marketing strategies, plan marketing programs, and organize, implement and control the marketing effort. The specificities of the marketing of services and their implications in terms of marketing strategies are emphasized.
GIIM 620 Financial Statement Analysis II (3 credits)
Prerequisite: For MIM and GIIM MBA students: GIIM 615 or DIM 615 or MIM 615 or IMBA 615.
This course examines the analysis and use of financial statements and disclosures in the investment valuation process, as well as the impact of international differences and managerial choice on the financial statements.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 620, MIM 620, or IMBA 620 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 621 Fixed Income Analysis (1.5 credits)
Prerequisite: For MIM and GIIM MBA students: GIIM 615 or DIM 615 or MIM 615 or IMBA 615.
This course deals with the risk and return characteristics of debt instruments, term structure of interest rates, valuation of securities with embedded derivative securities or other unique features. The unique features of real estate and private equity investments are also covered.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 621, MIM 621, or IMBA 621 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 622 Derivatives (3 credits)
Prerequisite: For MIM and GIIM MBA students: GIIM 615 or DIM 615 or MIM 615 or IMBA 615.
This course focuses on the theory and practice of futures, swaps and option valuation.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 622, MIM 622, or IMBA 622 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 623 Asset Pricing and Portfolio Management II (1.5 credits)
Prerequisite: For MIM and GIIM MBA students: GIIM 615 or DIM 615 or MIM 615 or IMBA 615.
This course analyzes the theory and critically evaluates the empirical evidence regarding asset pricing models. Implications for the correlation structure of returns and the impact on risk and return forecasting are also covered. This course discusses the role of alternative portfolio management philosophies and their implications for asset valuations and portfolio performance evaluation. Topics include the use and role of quantitative methods in the evaluation and forecasting of investment performance as well as the implications of asset pricing model predictions and failures for portfolio management.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 623, MIM 623, or IMBA 623 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 624 Analysis of Equity Investments (3 credits)
Prerequisite: For MIM and GIIM MBA students: GIIM 615 or DIM 615 or MIM 615 or IMBA 615.
This course reviews the use of fundamental analysis and other methodologies to generate investment valuations and risk analyses. The impact of special situations on the valuation process and the valuation of equity derivative securities will be examined.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 624, MIM 624, or IMBA 624 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 625 CFA® Exam Preparation Course Level II (non-credit)
Prerequisite: GIIM 615, DIM 615, MIM 615 or IMBA 615.
This course will review the material needed for the Level II CFA® exam. Permission of the Program is required to register for this course.
GIIM 626 Organizational Behaviour (3 credits)
This course focuses on individual and group behavior and the interactions of behavioural phenomena. Concepts such as motivation, leadership, group behaviour and managing change in organizations are examined. Students acquire an understanding of change processes and skills relating to organizational diagnosis and change.
GIIM 631 Asset Allocation and Performance Measurement (3 credits)
Prerequisite: GIIM 625, DIM 625, MIM 625, or IMBA 625.
This course will examine the estimation of expected returns and risks for asset classes and individual assets, the development of strategies for managing portfolios of domestic and foreign securities (equity, fixed income, real estate, etc.), the management of portfolio risk, and the evaluation of portfolio and manager performance.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 631, MIM 631, IMBA 631, DIM 632, MIM 632, or IMBA 632 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 633 Investment Law and Ethics (3 credits)
Prerequisite: For MIM and GIIM MBA students: GIIM 625 or DIM 625 or MIM 625 or IMBA 625.
This course covers issues regarding the management of investment funds including techniques for the identification and prevention of professional misconduct, and the nature and drafting of compliance procedures. The practice of portfolio management and investment valuation are studied through the use of topical cases.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 633, MIM 633, or IMBA 633 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 634 CFA® Exam Preparation Course Level III (non-credit)
Prerequisite: GIIM 625, DIM 625, MIM 625, or IMBA 625.
This course will review the material needed for the Level III CFA® exam. Permission of the Program is required to register for this course.
GIIM 636 Alternative Investments (1.5 credits)
Prerequisite: GIIM 625, DIM 625, MIM 625, or IMBA 625.
This course will cover a description of investments such as hedge funds, real estate and the private equity market.
Note: Students who have taken DIM 621, MIM 621, IMBA 621, MIM 636, or IMBA 636 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 637 Strategic Management (3 credits)
This course integrates the core functional disciplines of business within a strategic perspective and introduces several strategic management concepts, including industry analysis and dynamics, the organizational resource audit, strategic typologies, the role of the general manager, and the management of strategic transformations. The principal goal is to develop and enhance student ability in problem identification, environmental and organizational analysis, strategic alternative formulation, and action implementation. The pedagogy of the course is based upon comprehensive case studies that deal with strategic issues in a variety of contemporary business contexts.
GIIM 653 Seminar in Investment Analysis and Management (3 credits)
Prerequisite: GIIM 625, DIM 625, MIM 625, or IMBA 625.
This course will concentrate heavily on portfolio risk management issues. Topics such as the effect of cash drag, the use of equity and debt derivatives to manage risk and the uses and abuses of value at risk (VAR) will be explored. Other topics include equity style and its importance index funds and relevant criteria for the selection of investment managers.
Note: Students who have taken MIM 653 or IMBA 653 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 654 Seminar in International Investment Analysis and Management (3 credits)
Prerequisite: GIIM 625, DIM 625, MIM 625, or IMBA 625.
This course begins with a discussion of exchange rates and to what extent economic factors and market sentiment are important in the determination of these rates. Issues of importance that international investors face will be examined along with the benefits of international diversification. The course will conclude with the analysis of issues relevant to emerging markets and factors that would influence the construction of a portfolio that may include an emerging market component.
Note: Students who have taken MIM 654 or IMBA 654 may not take this course for credit.
GIIM 655 Socially Responsible and Sustainable Investment (3 credits)
The aim of this course is to provide students with a knowledge of socially responsible investment related issues that transcend the modern portfolio theory of Markowitz. Students gain an understanding of sustainable and responsible investment. They also develop the ability to uncover non-traditional risk and return drivers. Relevant case studies and a series of readings are relied upon to provide the basis for the course.
GIIM 695 Special Topics in Investment Management (3 credits)
Note: When offered, this course may substitute a GIIM required core course, for which students must obtain approval of the Program Director in order to register.
GDBA 531 Professional Business Skills (3 credits)
This course provides students with the necessary skills that help with successful interaction with others in business settings. Topics include designing and delivering effective written and oral messages from concept to delivery, working in groups, and negotiating and resolving conflict by using ethical communication tactics. Pedagogical methods include group-based work, in-class workshops, case studies, presentations and report writing.
GDBA 532 Accounting (3 credits)
This course surveys financial and managerial accounting from the point of view of the users of financial information. Financial accounting topics include the framework of financial accounting, the analysis of transactions, and the preparation and analysis of financial statements. Topics in management accounting are budgeting and control, costing and cost allocation, the cost-volume-profit planning model, and short-term and long-term decision making in business. The ethical dimensions of accounting are explored throughout the course. Pedagogical methods include lectures, exercises, case studies and class discussions.
Note: Students who have received credit for GDBA 501 may not take this course for credit.
GDBA 533 Managing People in Organizations (3 credits)
Prerequisites: GDBA 531 previously or concurrently.
This course is concerned with understanding and managing individual and group behaviour in organizations. It examines themes such as personality, motivation, emotions, leadership, ethics, and group dynamics and how they relate to the role of managers in organizations. The course covers these topics in an integrated manner so as to prepare students to become effective managers. Pedagogical methods include in-class exercises and case studies.
Note: Students who have received credit for GDBA 503 may not take this course for credit.
GDBA 534 Marketing Management (3 credits)
Prerequisites: GDBA 531 previously or concurrently.
This course is designed to provide students with the necessary skills to develop a marketing plan.  Topics include micro- and macro-level environmental analysis, customer behaviour, market segmentation, value generating practices and developing a complete marketing plan. Pedagogical methods include lectures, case studies and in-class presentations.
Note: Students who have received credit for GDBA 504 may not take this course for credit.
GCE 511 Starting your Own Business (3 credits)
This course provides students with essential business knowledge. It covers the basic principles of self-employment and management of a micro-enterprise such as an artist-run studio, design firm, or a professional practice. Students learn how to organize and finance their new venture, set up basic accounting structures, understand tax implications, and protect their intellectual property. Pedagogical methods include lectures and case studies.
GCE 512 Marketing your Own Busines (3 credits)
Prerequisite: GCE 511 previously or concurrently.
This course focuses on entrepreneurial marketing for the micro-enterprise. Students learn how to strategize, plan and implement marketing programs in both online and offline environments. They also learn how to tailor these programs to address the needs of their audiences and customers and how to align their business accordingly. Topics include opportunity identification, demand generation, value pricing, promotion, channel decisions, and developing a marketing mindset. Pedagogical methods include lectures, case studies, class discussions and the development of a marketing plan.
GCE 513 Growing your Own Business (3 credits)
Prerequisite: GCE 511 oreviously or concurrently.
This course adds to the knowledge acquired in GCE 511. It covers the issues that will arise as a micro-enterprise grows. Topics include strategies for achieving and sustaining growth, hiring and supervising staff, selecting software applications and protecting sensitive information. Pedagogical methods include lectures and case studies.
GCE 514 Entrepreneurship: Venture Creation (3 credits)
Prerequisites: GCE 511, 512, 513 previously or concurrently.
This capstone course is designed to guide students in conducting a market study and developing their complete business plan including their operational and financial plans and integrating the marketing plan. Topics include: transforming their idea into a business, analyzing the market and competition, and planning operations and finances for the next three to five years. Pedagogical methods include lectures, case studies, and the development of the business plan.
Note: Students who have received credit for this topic under GDBA 595 may not take this course for credit.
GCE 595 Special Topics (3 credits)
Special topics for this course are stated in the Class Schedule.
INDI 800-819 Doctoral Level Studies (6 credits)
INDI 820-839 Doctoral Level Studies (3 credits)
INDI 840-884 Doctoral Level Studies (variable credits)
INDI 885 Doctoral Comprehensive Examination (3 credits)
INDI 886 Special Topics (3 credits)
This optional seminar addresses a topic or range of topics of relevance to the research interests of a cross-section of the students enrolled in the program.
INDI 887 Doctoral Thesis Proposal (3 credits)
INDI 890 Doctoral Research and Thesis (66 credits)
INDI 898 Doctoral Directed Research Course (variable credits)
The student conducts research in a lab or another research site under the direction of his/her principal supervisor.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. INDI 898A, INDI 898B, etc. These courses will be graded pass/fail.
INDI 899 International Doctoral Level Studies (3 credits)
Comprehensive Examination
At the doctoral level, students are required to write an examination testing their basic knowledge of the relevant areas of each component discipline comprising their program of study. The comprehensive examination takes place after students have completed the required 18 course credits. For most students, the format will involve three written examination questions. Students who are involved in a research-creation project may include a practice-based component as one of their examination questions.
The student and supervisory committee, comprised of three faculty members, meet prior to the comprehensive exam to determine the format of the exam and the evaluation mechanism, as well as to approve a reading list of approximately 20 titles per question. The student has two weeks to complete the examination (responses are typically 1600-2400 words per question). The student submits the completed exam within the given timeframe to the INDI Coordinator. The student's supervisory committee evaluates the examination, and the principal supervisor submits the evaluations along with the pass/fail grade to the INDI Coordinator. Students who fail their comprehensive exam will be given one opportunity to rewrite the exam.
Following the exam, the student meets with the supervisory committee to discuss the results of the exam and plans for the thesis proposal.
Thesis
A thesis in an Individualized Program represents a unique contribution to scholarship undertaken while the student is enrolled in the program. The doctoral theses offered at this University in cognate areas will normally provide an appropriate guide to the format and scope of the Individualized Program thesis requirements.
In the case of a nontraditional thesis – such as one involving a creative production – the requirement of scholarly contribution still applies. Thus, while a thesis may present a creative work as its central focus, it should nevertheless provide a scholarly discussion placing that work in the context of related ideas and works. As in the case of traditional theses, the nontraditional thesis is submitted to an oral examination where it is exposed to scholarly criticism and where the student is given an opportunity to defend it.
The thesis defence must provide for the inclusion of one external examiner at the doctoral level.
INDI 600-619 Master’s Level Studies (6 credits)
INDI 620-639 Master’s Level Studies (3 credits)
INDI 640-684 Master’s Level Studies (variable credits)
INDI 686 Special Topics (3 credits)
This optional seminar addresses a topic or range of topics of relevance to the research interests of a cross-section of the students enrolled in the program.
INDI 687 Master’s Thesis Proposal (3 credits)
INDI 690 Master’s Research and Thesis (24 credits)
INDI 698 Master’s Directed Research Course (variable credits)
The student conducts research in a lab or another research site under the direction of his/her principal supervisor.
Note: The content will vary from term to term and from year to year. Students may re-register for this course, provided the course content has changed. Changes in content will be indicated by a letter following the course number, e.g. INDI 698A, INDI 698B, etc. These courses will be graded pass/fail.
INDI 699 International Master’s Level Studies (3 credits)
Thesis
A thesis in an Individualized Program represents a unique contribution to scholarship undertaken while the student is enrolled in the program. The master's theses offered at this University in cognate areas will normally provide an appropriate guide to the format and scope of the Individualized Program thesis requirements.
In the case of a nontraditional thesis – such as one involving a creative production – the requirement of scholarly contribution still applies. Thus, while a thesis may present a creative work as its central focus, it should nevertheless provide a scholarly discussion placing that work in the context of related ideas and works. As in the case of traditional theses, the nontraditional thesis is submitted to an oral examination where it is exposed to scholarly criticism and where the student is given an opportunity to defend it.
At the master's level, the thesis defence will include the student's principal supervisor and at least two other committee members, one of whom may be an external examiner.
ETEC 613 Learning Theories (3 credits)
The primary goal of the course is for students to develop a critical understanding of classic and contemporary theories of learning, such as behaviourism, cognitivism, neo-cognitivism, and socio-constructivism as they inform instructional practice. Secondary course goals include enhancing students' abilities to: a) read and evaluate the primary literature in the area; b) present and write within the discipline; c) evaluate applications of theory to practice; and d) collaborate professionally including via computer conferencing.
UNIT 601 Teaching and Learning in Higher Education (3 credits)
This seminar course is designed as a survey at an advanced level of the theory and practice of higher education pedagogy through an examination of the existing literature. Topics may include but are not limited to student learning assessment, course design, teaching strategies, student diversity, technology in the classroom and reflective practice.
UNIT 602 Development of a University Course (3 credits)
Prerequisite: ETEC 613, UNIT 601.
In this directed study course, students develop the objectives, outline, content, notes, assignments, and assessment plan for the course that they will teach during UNIT 603, Internship in University Teaching. The prepared materials are evaluated by the students’ teaching mentor. This course is graded on a pass/fail basis.
Note: Normally, this course will be one available via the graduate calendar or as a slot course, and not a new course which would require curriculum approval.
UNIT 603 Internship in University Teaching (6 credits)
Prerequisite: ETEC 613, UNIT 601 and 602.
This internship requires students to teach one 3-credit university course in their discipline using the materials developed in UNIT 602, Development of a University Course. Students develop a teaching portfolio which includes a teaching statement, an explanation of pedagogical practices used in the course, self-evaluation of the teaching, students’ evaluations of the course, and a plan for improvements to the course content and teaching practices. This internship is graded on a pass/fail basis.
